[Amit Varma]: Many of my friends tell me that I'm a young man, but I'm afraid all these friends are
[Amit Varma]: older than me.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in my late 40s, and when you get here, you realize how fast time passes.
[Amit Varma]: It seems like just yesterday that I was feeling the oppressive pressures of adulthood and
[Amit Varma]: 30.
[Amit Varma]: And boom, blink a few times, years have passed.
[Amit Varma]: The scarcity of time becomes real.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one way of dealing with this is a modern way of living.
[Amit Varma]: Do everything fast, fast, fast, throw yourself into the world.
[Amit Varma]: Spend every waking moment doing something, even if it is only on your smartphone.
[Amit Varma]: Life is always moving, but it doesn't go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: It is shallow.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not berating others as much as I am lamenting my own choices and the weakness of character
[Amit Varma]: that has stopped me from breaking out of this.
[Amit Varma]: I want to live a slow life.
[Amit Varma]: I want to have long conversations, sit with friends without the pressure of performing
[Amit Varma]: for the world.
[Amit Varma]: I want to go out, look at the world instead of being lost in my own head.
[Amit Varma]: How can we learn to do this?
[Amit Varma]: How can we stop throwing ourselves into the chaos around us, but just sit back and observe?
[Amit Varma]: How do we give ourselves a space to reflect?
[Amit Varma]: One way of doing so is to write.
[Amit Varma]: If you build a habit of writing, then when you write, you withdraw into a quiet space
[Amit Varma]: where life slows down and even becomes clearer.
[Amit Varma]: You examine your own thoughts and perhaps even form them.
[Amit Varma]: Because by writing every day, you don't just see the world a little better.
[Amit Varma]: You also shape your own self.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe that's the best way to fight against a relentless march of time.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is my friend Amitava Kumar.
[Amit Varma]: Now, where do I start talking about Amitava?
[Amit Varma]: He was born in a small town in Bihar in 1963.
[Amit Varma]: He did his schooling in Patna, went to college in Delhi, then went to the US where he joined
[Amit Varma]: academia and is now a professor of English at Vassar College.
[Amit Varma]: He has written many books that are so varied that it is hard for me to describe them in
[Amit Varma]: one sentence.
[Amit Varma]: There's memoir and personal essays, there's reportage, including about the 2002 Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: riots and the Bhagalpur blindings, there is poetry, there are novels, he has written screenplays
[Amit Varma]: for documentaries, and his latest book is in a category of its own.
[Amit Varma]: It's called The Blue Book, and it contains writing and art by him.
[Amit Varma]: He discovered the joy of drawing and painting a few years ago, and he would often juxtapose
[Amit Varma]: his art with his writing on his Instagram page.
[Amit Varma]: It's like a journal.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's like a journal from decades past, before the internet, when we weren't
[Amit Varma]: always lost in our smartphones, when we had the space to reflect when we had Tehraaf.
[Amit Varma]: The Blue Book moved me and inspired me so much.
[Amit Varma]: It's full of magical moments.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a book I will keep going back to for the rest of my life.
[Amit Varma]: I also loved this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh is a highly regarded writing teacher, and I felt I was also learning about life
[Amit Varma]: when I spoke to him.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to this conversation, though, a quick plug.
[Amit Varma]: Registration is now open for the March cohort of my online writing course, The Art of Clear
[Amit Varma]: Writing.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to indiancard.com slash clear writing to register.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you're listening to this episode at a later point in time, the course is ongoing.
[Amit Varma]: So go to indiancard.com slash clear writing for more details and listen to this episode.
[Amit Varma]: It will inspire you to write more and live better.
[Amit Varma]: But first, a commercial break about why you should also read more.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way, a couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ
[Amit Varma]: compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves by reading
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to ctqcompounds.com and check
[Amit Varma]: out their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called future stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: 2500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh, welcome to the C and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, thank you.
[Guest]: Long time no see.
[Unknown]: Long time.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's definitely more than a decade.
[Amit Varma]: But yet there is that sense of familiarity, right?
[Guest]: I think it is.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know about you, but I think that when I was young, because I would think
[Guest]: this year, you know, January 1st was coming and I would think I will write a short story
[Guest]: this year.
[Guest]: I'm talking about maybe when I was, I don't know, 20.
[Guest]: So at that time, achievements were so scarce.
[Guest]: And even once goals were so limited, that the passage of time was always very clear
[Guest]: to me, that this year has passed, next year is starting, now I'll be 22, now I'll be 23.
[Guest]: Maybe this year I will get a girlfriend, you know what I'm saying.
[Guest]: Now, years after years, it all collapsed together, you know, time.
[Guest]: So this sense of time has also, I don't know, it has just changed in this middle age.
[Guest]: Entire eons seem to have vanished.
[Guest]: It's all a blur.
[Guest]: But I remember that evening, we met, we were sitting outside and we were talking, or not
[Guest]: to put it in very romantic terms, but there were waves of the sea, etc. etc. in Mumbai.
[Unknown]: It was one of the seaside hotels, I forget which one, maybe it was Marriott, I don't
[Unknown]: remember.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's a theme I was going to kind of bring up, which is the compression of time.
[Amit Varma]: Like I teach this online writing course, and I teach four webinars, and the fourth webinar
[Amit Varma]: is about process, where I say I'm going to move past the craft, and talk about the process
[Amit Varma]: and how you build writing habits and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason that was important to me, which I have shared with participants also, is that
[Amit Varma]: I think that is a one area in which I failed, where I say that I look back now, if I if
[Amit Varma]: I did this course in my 20s, I would have learned so much.
[Amit Varma]: But this is the most important thing I needed to learn because in the blink of an eye, 15-20
[Amit Varma]: years have passed, the time just passed, the 10-20 books I should have written never happened,
[Amit Varma]: it all just went.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also thinking of this when I was rereading your excellent book, A Matter of
[Amit Varma]: Rats about Patna.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Patna's glorious history, and you know, how people confuse Chandragupta
[Amit Varma]: II and Chandragupta Maurya and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless, you know, you were talking about the glory of the fourth century, I think,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, Fa Hine called it the Florence of the East.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought ki theek hai, you know, when I'm 20, and I'm looking back, I'm saying ki
[Amit Varma]: my God, so many centuries have passed.
[Amit Varma]: But when in my own life, already 48 years have passed, a little more in yours, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: seem that long.
[Amit Varma]: It seems like, you know, in a sense, it must have been just, you know, you just go back
[Amit Varma]: a little bit and you're in a glorious Patna again, you're in Nalanda University again.
[Guest]: So do you teach in your course, ki bhai, how will you stop time or how will you measure
[Amit Varma]: time or how will you record time, yeh aap sikhate hain, do you teach them?
[Amit Varma]: Itni gherai mein nahi jaate hain.
[Amit Varma]: Do you mean that in terms of technique or do you mean it in that broad romantic sense
[Guest]: of writing?
[Guest]: I'm thinking, for example, of the occasion for our conversation right now is the blue
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: It came out of, in some ways, measuring time, recording time, yeh jo waqt beet raha hai,
[Guest]: how to be faithful to it in some ways, yaani ki hum log lockdown mein hain maan lijiye,
[Guest]: if you talk about that time, how to be faithful to it and how also to be active and respond
[Guest]: to it actively.
[Guest]: Toh main obituaries par jaise, New York Times ke obituaries pe tasvire banane laga, you
[Guest]: know, I made drawings on these newspapers.
[Guest]: I'm trying to say to you that what you and I are agreeing about this passage of time,
[Guest]: this blink of time, you know, what were these decades, last 18 years, you said, for example,
[Guest]: they would have had a different density if we had every night written something or every
[Guest]: morning recorded something.
[Guest]: Simple.
[Guest]: So that is something I am teaching, you know, main abhi aap se London mein baat kar raha
[Guest]: hai, I have brought 13 of my students from Vassar, where I teach in Upstreet New York,
[Guest]: I've brought them here.
[Guest]: And I just sent them the other day an excerpt, one, two pages from Sally Rooney's latest
[Guest]: book, where a woman called Eileen says that every day she thought she would start a book
[Guest]: called the Book of Life, and in which she would record a phrase, jaise ki, there were
[Guest]: leaves blowing on the street, yeah, you know, today, it rained all day, jo bhi hai.
[Guest]: And she says that now when she reads that phrase, it brings back something, the taste
[Guest]: of that day.
[Guest]: Toh main apne students se keh raha hoon ki, bhai aap log, when you're on the tube, when
[Guest]: we are going out, jaise ki Saturday ko hum log Dixton ja rahe hain, you know, where the
[Guest]: Caribbean community came and stayed, and where there was a riot to protest against police
[Guest]: brutality.
[Guest]: Toh main kar raha hoon ki, aap wahan jayein jab jayein, toh you write down a phrase or
[Guest]: two.
[Guest]: Main toh khud kar raha hoon, jaise ki, you know, I'm talking to you, there's this journal
[Guest]: in which I'm writing a few things, you said about time, I wrote about time right there.
[Guest]: So that time doesn't seem to, jaise ki, okay, okay, listen, can I read to you something
[Amit Varma]: that I noticed the other day?
[Amit Varma]: Please, please.
[Guest]: I'm listening to Mrinal Pandey talking about her first memory, a procession of people was
[Guest]: approaching them.
[Guest]: She was a small child, who are these?
[Guest]: The child Mrinal Pandey asked, her elder sister said that they were re-fu-gee, these toh tumhare
[Guest]: show pe padha, suna maine unko, but that's a little story that I just wanted to note
[Guest]: down, especially the way it was articulated in those three, aur yeh note agar main phir
[Guest]: se aaj se das saal baad, if I just pick up my journal and I'm flipping, this little description
[Guest]: will bring back to me the entire conversation that I heard between you and Mrinal ji, and
[Guest]: it will bring back also, I want to insist, it will bring back also the moment of my sitting
[Guest]: on this table, in a flat in London, and where we were, how my son was here, and my wife
[Guest]: was in the other room, etc.
[Guest]: And my expectation that soon I too will be talking to my friend Amit Varna.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is a practice of writing in a journal, of making a record of
[Guest]: things is the way to mark time, not to stop it, not to stop time, but to mark it in a
[Guest]: way so that all is not lost.
[Amit Varma]: So let's dig a little deeper.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I was, you know, that really struck a chord when I was reading or re-reading
[Amit Varma]: your books as it were, is the excellent process advice you give to yourself, ki har roj 150
[Amit Varma]: words likho, and in my class it's 200 words where I tell these guys that every day just
[Amit Varma]: write 200 words, even if you're, you know, ill, going to the airport, aap smartphone
[Amit Varma]: pe likh sakte ho, it's not a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: And this sense of the importance of constantly writing is captured beautifully by the Susan
[Amit Varma]: Sontag quote in the start of the blue book, where she says, in the journal, I do not just
[Amit Varma]: express myself more openly than I could do to any person, I create myself.
[Amit Varma]: The journal is a vehicle for my sense of selfhood.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a Joan Didion quote I use in my course to talk about the importance of writing
[Amit Varma]: where Didion said, I do not know what I think until I write it down, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that what we do when we write, when we write regularly, is that we
[Amit Varma]: are not only capturing the moment or that time or the flavor of that time, but we are
[Amit Varma]: also deepening our sense of self, that when we write, we are forced to reflect upon what
[Amit Varma]: we have seen.
[Amit Varma]: When we know we are going to write, we see more deeply and more clearly because we know
[Amit Varma]: we are going to write at some point, sab kuch ho jata hai.
[Amit Varma]: So is this a sort of a process that you've noticed in yourself, kya aap matlab shuru
[Amit Varma]: se aise the or was there a point in your life where you gradually began to realize that
[Amit Varma]: my God, this writing is not just about me expressing myself to the world.
[Amit Varma]: It's about me shaping myself.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yes, that's a very good point.
[Guest]: I don't think that realization came till much later.
[Guest]: There's a story I think I tell in the blue book, maybe I would have been in the sixth
[Guest]: standard in Patna.
[Guest]: An uncle of mine was trying to bribe a transport bureaucrat because he would, the bureaucracy
[Guest]: worked this way ki bhaiya wo banda batata aapko ki aapki bus kis line pe chalege aur on some
[Guest]: lines you get money on the others not anyway.
[Guest]: So he was taken to a restaurant and I was taken with him.
[Guest]: And main upar jab dekha restaurant ke, when I looked at the ceiling, there were these
[Guest]: shiny bangles, pieces of bangles embedded in it aur mujhe khayal aaya ki but how, ye
[Guest]: kaise likhenge isko ki.
[Guest]: And maybe I made a link with the fact ki hotel ka naam ambar tha aur ye sky hai aur ye sky
[Guest]: badi, you know, bangle ki shimmering stars, to mujhe laga, I was trying to, how will I
[Guest]: write?
[Guest]: I very clearly remember thinking about this and I very also clearly remember the shot
[Guest]: of envy and admiration I felt when just a little while later in the school magazine,
[Guest]: one boy had already described it, just that sky.
[Guest]: So for me, shuru mein, it was more about the question of the self had not entered, which
[Guest]: I think you were very right to say is the real point.
[Guest]: It was more about finding a language that was adequate to the surroundings I was.
[Guest]: And another defining memory is my coming to Delhi after I got a scholarship and coming
[Guest]: to study and reading people like Dom Morris, Khushwant Singh, because us samay tak jo
[Guest]: pradhai hoti thi na, we had learned or read things where people were describing distant
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: England ki description ho gayi.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the cliched story about this is ki bhaiyya, saare desi log ya colonials
[Guest]: know about daffodils, lekin Jasmine ya wo, you know, Champa ko kis tar se describe karein
[Guest]: hum nahi jaante hain, khair.
[Guest]: So there, Safdarjung airport ke paas, seeing the bats wheeling in the sky and thinking
[Guest]: ki iske baarein hum kaise likhein, is aakash ke baarein ho aur is jaanwar ke baarein ho,
[Guest]: yeh humein pata nahi tha.
[Guest]: And then I read Mano Majra by Khushwant Singh ho dekha ki he has described the slow relay
[Guest]: of bats.
[Guest]: Ab mujhe laga haan, I have found a language, you know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: Now your question is, ki was there also an idea of how that by writing, one was finding
[Guest]: oneself?
[Guest]: I think I only dimly perceived it at that point.
[Guest]: And I think it was only after a few more years, the idea that writing, and by writing, I was
[Guest]: shaping myself as a perceptive or quote unquote, sensitive or socially aware, or at least an
[Guest]: observer.
[Guest]: Yeh thodi der se aayi, but that was the critical thing, you know.
[Guest]: One thing I want to add is, aap abhi Mumbai se humse baat karna hai.
[Guest]: And you know, I always associate among other so many other wonderful people that city with
[Guest]: my friend and our friend maybe, Suketu Mehta, main uske baarein humeinsha yeh soshta hu,
[Guest]: that when I go, when I'm walking with him, why is it that I find things happen or stories
[Guest]: happen?
[Guest]: And I think that's because he's looking for stories.
[Guest]: Let's say two people go to a platform.
[Guest]: One person goes to the railway platform to catch a train.
[Guest]: The other person goes to the platform to write a story, to observe.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, they hear a clamor at the end of the platform.
[Guest]: Jo banda train pakarne aaya hai, he will stay with his luggage because he has to catch the
[Guest]: train.
[Guest]: The person who has come looking for a story will rush towards the clamor.
[Guest]: And he will probably find that, oh, a child has been left behind.
[Guest]: The parent went into the train, thought the child had followed, and now there is a child.
[Guest]: The child has to be reunited with the parent.
[Guest]: A story has started, toh Suketu ji, wahi rahe jaayenge, bachche ke saath, till the child
[Guest]: and the parent is found, he will have a story to pursue.
[Guest]: That is the difference, the idea that now I do inhabit the space when I think that I
[Guest]: am both looking for a language, but I'm also looking for the narrative of my life.
[Guest]: Where am I?
[Guest]: Who is around me?
[Guest]: What is happening to us?
[Guest]: Where is the world going?
[Guest]: So yes, to what you were earlier asking me, my answer is yes, but it was a long journey
[Guest]: to that realization, and it always takes time, but here we are.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll dial back to the first part of your answer, and in fact, leaving the self out
[Amit Varma]: of it, just talk about observation and how one sort of learns to see.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'll quote from a couple of places from your books that I really enjoyed.
[Amit Varma]: From a matter of rats, I was struck by this passage where you write, quote, in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of the night one winter during a visit to Patna, I was sitting at the dining table with
[Amit Varma]: my jet-lagged two-year-old son watching a cartoon on my computer.
[Amit Varma]: I had turned on only a single dim light as I didn't want my parents to be disturbed.
[Amit Varma]: We must have been sitting there quietly for about half an hour before my little boy asked,
[Amit Varma]: Baba, what is that?
[Amit Varma]: He was pointing beyond the screen.
[Amit Varma]: There were two enormous rats walking away from us.
[Amit Varma]: They looked like stout ladies on tiny heels on their way to the market.
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't have been surprised to see them carrying small, elegant handbags.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: It was such a delightful moment later on, there's a similar moment where somebody asks
[Amit Varma]: you to write a few sentences about Patna and an issue that that magazine is doing for vacations.
[Amit Varma]: And you say, quote, I wrote that going to Patna for a vacation was rather like going
[Amit Varma]: to a bus stop for a martini, which is again, just absolutely brilliant say so much.
[Amit Varma]: Later on in Husband of a Fanatic, there is this brilliant description.
[Amit Varma]: I won't read out the full thing, but you talk about what sort of the burnt houses you would
[Amit Varma]: see in parts of Ahmedabad, like Naroda Patia and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you describe it in detail.
[Amit Varma]: But I am struck by a couple of images, one where you talk about how the blades of a ceiling
[Amit Varma]: fan had dropped in the fire and resembled the wilted petals of a flower.
[Amit Varma]: In another, a sack of sugar had turned to dark amber syrup and flowed onto the steps
[Amit Varma]: where it had dried, which again, I thought was just such a powerful image. And in the
[Amit Varma]: blue book, at one point, you write about this photograph that appeared on your Facebook
[Amit Varma]: timeline about a railway, an accident on a railway line 16 workers who were sleeping
[Amit Varma]: on the railway track, because they were, you know, walking on the tracks to go home because
[Amit Varma]: they didn't want to be harassed by the cops on the streets, they were run over by a train.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written quote, the first item I noticed in the image was a red Hawaii chappal.
[Amit Varma]: I think abandoned footwear tell their own forlorn story, a solitary chappal or shoe
[Amit Varma]: narrates a tale of hasty exit, not from a glitzy ball like fair Cinderella, but from
[Amit Varma]: life itself.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you talk about the rotis scattered in the cinders in the ground, a lemon, one
[Amit Varma]: blue mask, a pair of black trousers, no torso attached to it, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And these are really powerful images.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I remember that, you know, when in the aftermath of the tsunami, I was traveling
[Amit Varma]: through the coast of Tamil Nadu and blogging about my experiences, and my most powerful
[Amit Varma]: memory of that time.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, one saw dead bodies in Nagapattinam and walked with charred bodies all around
[Amit Varma]: which had been there for three, four days, and all those things are there.
[Amit Varma]: But my most striking memory is still a set of disparate memories of clocks and watches
[Amit Varma]: in different villages across the coastline, all of which had stopped at a different time.
[Amit Varma]: And by looking at the time when they had stopped, you could make out when the wave sort of hit,
[Amit Varma]: you know, going back to your earlier theme of sort of capturing time, a very poignant
[Amit Varma]: way of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question to you is also partly a lament.
[Amit Varma]: I think I don't observe things well enough.
[Amit Varma]: When I set out to write about something, then I am seeing, but otherwise, I am not often
[Amit Varma]: enough in the moment.
[Amit Varma]: In some ways, I am a third guy at the railway platform.
[Amit Varma]: One guy is looking for a story, one guy is waiting for a train, one guy is lost in his
[Unknown]: own head.
[Unknown]: Yes, yes, yes.
[Unknown]: Kuch nahi chal raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm that third guy.
[Amit Varma]: You are clearly a bit more like that second guy, right?
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about like you mentioned earlier that you were jealous of your when
[Amit Varma]: you were a child of how that other person who had seen that thing on the roof had written
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, your own power of observation came from conscious effort.
[Amit Varma]: Is part of it a conscious effort because I have to write and therefore you see and as
[Amit Varma]: part of it become then a reflexive habit where every day whether you are writing or not,
[Amit Varma]: you are noticing things in a different way.
[Guest]: I do think that if you are writing things, you actually almost create feeling or affect.
[Guest]: In other words, you do something because you know you're going to write.
[Guest]: But let me explain that a little bit more like how it happened in my own evolution as
[Guest]: a writer, in case there are young people listening.
[Guest]: And there was an essay by George Orwell that we read in which he explains that there was
[Guest]: a voice running in his head always like providing a narrative.
[Guest]: Which would be right now, for example, would be the sun streaming in a very unusual London
[Guest]: sun, very bright, very harsh was streaming in through the sunlight was streaming through
[Guest]: the window and hitting the right side of my face.
[Guest]: Even as I was talking to Amit, I thought I should move the plant that had toppled over
[Guest]: yesterday into from my windowsill into the sunlight so that it receives some light.
[Guest]: So this idea, when I read this description in Orwell, I thought, and I'm looking at that
[Guest]: woman who is standing beside the vendor and this is how she's looking.
[Guest]: And so that conscious cultivation that you were talking about became this cultivation
[Guest]: of a voice in my head describing the slope of a roof or the smoke rising from a chimney
[Guest]: or an egret taking flight or the dark descending after sunset.
[Guest]: And I think that's how I consciously that I would say is the practice.
[Guest]: I also think that in teaching writing, I set up challenges for my students and doing some
[Guest]: of that myself also encouraged me to see one thing I remember very, very clearly is I don't
[Guest]: know how it happened, but I would have been, I don't know, 17, 18, Delhi man, I quite clearly
[Guest]: remember that I would enter a room and try to think if I closed my eyes, how many things
[Guest]: have I seen here that I will remember.
[Guest]: There was a Sai Baba ka temple and a politician turned writer or writer turned politician
[Guest]: invited me to come and meet him there and I very clearly have this memory.
[Guest]: I must have been 18 or so.
[Guest]: I very clearly have this memory that I shut my eyes for a second to think how many things
[Guest]: do I remember here in this hotel room.
[Guest]: It was an alien room for him.
[Guest]: It was an alien room for me.
[Guest]: And I thought this is new.
[Guest]: And how do I, what do I remember?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I remember the chair on Prash.
[Guest]: I remember the table.
[Guest]: I remember, you know,
[Guest]: a small towel, which has been folded in a particular way.
[Guest]: And that just became fixed.
[Guest]: Let me, which is a much more recent thing.
[Guest]: I'm a drawing start, but that is what you see in blue book.
[Guest]: And that has been another way, which really people like John Berger, et cetera, explain
[Guest]: you do not see the world unless you draw it.
[Guest]: That is also a part now of my regimen.
[Guest]: My role, I'm doing one drawing also every day, apart from writing every day.
[Guest]: I'm trying to do one drawing every day.
[Guest]: So not trying.
[Guest]: I am doing it actually, which is a way of training oneself to observe and to see.
[Amit Varma]: That's one of the things that kind of struck me about your very interesting book.
[Amit Varma]: Like the first time I noticed something like this being done, images used with words was
[Amit Varma]: WG Sebald and Austerlitz and so on, those dark black and white images.
[Amit Varma]: And and your stuff was also very powerful in the sense there is one particular drawing
[Amit Varma]: where I love the caption where I think you made it from a photograph where a guy was
[Amit Varma]: kneeling on the street and covered in blood.
[Amit Varma]: And your caption was something to the effect of man with red marks on him, which was so
[Amit Varma]: ironic and kind of went so well with the image.
[Amit Varma]: How has sort of getting into that practice of drawing all the time changed the way that
[Amit Varma]: you see?
[Amit Varma]: Like, does it change the way that you then come back to words and use those words?
[Amit Varma]: Has it made you kind of more economical?
[Amit Varma]: In what ways has that affected your imagination?
[Guest]: The same way, as I said earlier, that there was this voice running through my head that
[Guest]: was telling me what I was noticing and I would try to translate what I was seeing into words.
[Guest]: Now, this recent practice of drawing, what it has made me do is that I'm drawing with
[Guest]: my eye all the time.
[Guest]: And these buildings and the chimneys are just so distinctive about the city that my eye
[Guest]: is always doing that, you know.
[Guest]: So that is an immediate thing I have seen.
[Guest]: Has it changed my relationship to words?
[Guest]: It's very interesting that you mentioned Sebald because what he's doing is he would
[Guest]: take an image.
[Guest]: He's writing about some period close to the Holocaust.
[Guest]: He would take an image.
[Guest]: Let's say that image is a postcard.
[Guest]: He would take the postcard, but instead of simply printing the postcard, he would introduce
[Guest]: a corruption in the image almost, if I could use the word, because he wanted to complicate
[Guest]: the relationship between word and image.
[Guest]: He did not want to say, look, this is the illustration.
[Guest]: He wanted you to actually engage in the mystery of science, s-i-g-n-s, it's a much more subtle
[Guest]: engagement than the reader has with what he or she is reading and what he or she is seeing.
[Guest]: What am I doing?
[Guest]: Am I doing?
[Guest]: Am I introducing ambivalence about the image?
[Guest]: In the case of the example you said of a man being lynched, I wanted to just, as I said
[Guest]: there, I wanted to slow jam the news.
[Guest]: In other words, where some things happen and the news is quickly spread and consumed, I
[Guest]: just wanted to slow it down.
[Guest]: My sense of him as he's pleading for his life also gets slowed down.
[Guest]: I'm absorbing it even emotionally in a slower way, in a more thoughtful way maybe also.
[Guest]: And if I do that, and if I'm surrounding it with a caption, and a caption that you rightly
[Guest]: said was interesting because it's a little bit more oblique, I'm again slowing down the
[Guest]: arrow of time so that our absorption in the moment and in the trauma itself is more, is
[Guest]: slowed down actually, really, yeah?
[Guest]: So that we absorb it quickly and we don't go past it but we linger with it a bit.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm doing.
[Guest]: And I guess, therefore, the answer to your question would be, the relationship is changing
[Guest]: in the sense that it becomes a little bit more, instead of being facile, it becomes
[Guest]: more meditative.
[Guest]: You know, like a longer song.
[Amit Varma]: The caption that you gave was actually a man with red marks on his body.
[Amit Varma]: And I was very struck by that because it seemed to reflect a theme that you have gone into
[Amit Varma]: in earlier books also, including in Husband of a Fanatic when you're traveling through
[Amit Varma]: all these places where so much violence has happened.
[Amit Varma]: This is page 92, by the way, and it seemed to indicate the banality of what's happening
[Amit Varma]: that the man is covered in blood and he's begging for his life and you describe him
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, a man with red marks on his body, where something so significant is described
[Amit Varma]: in such a banal way.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, in all of these places, what we see what you've wrote about so eloquently
[Amit Varma]: in Husband of a Fanatic as well, when you travel through Gujarat after the riots and
[Amit Varma]: everything that goes down there, is that normal life resumes, that, you know, there will be
[Amit Varma]: this explosive event, which will upend lives forever, and the world will never be the same
[Amit Varma]: again.
[Amit Varma]: And yet normality at some level will resume like that old cliche we use these days of
[Amit Varma]: the new normal and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: This caption seemed to have the same kind of effect, but we'll get back to that.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to sort of double click again on one aspect of your earlier answer and my earlier
[Amit Varma]: question about observation and drawing and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I thought back to your description of those rats, stout ladies on tiny heels, and you
[Amit Varma]: could imagine them with small elegant handbags.
[Amit Varma]: Now the thing is, if you were drawing this, you may not draw them like that.
[Amit Varma]: You might draw them differently.
[Amit Varma]: So what's happening, in a sense, is that what you're drawing and what you're writing is
[Amit Varma]: different because your skill sets are kind of different, your interest may be different,
[Amit Varma]: your aesthetic style may be different.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, a larger question that came up in and that has come up in earlier episodes
[Amit Varma]: I've done with creators is how much is your style and expression not just of what you
[Amit Varma]: can do, but also what you can't do, an expression of your limitations, as it were, like you
[Amit Varma]: can't draw the rats as fat little aunties, right?
[Amit Varma]: But you can draw them in a very interesting way, which is your own and which is your own
[Amit Varma]: voice.
[Amit Varma]: So here, obviously, I'm thinking in the context of drawing, because I would not be able to
[Amit Varma]: draw anything at all, and in, you know, and you've had decades more experience of writing,
[Amit Varma]: so much more fluid there.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because these are two different forms that you're expressing yourself in.
[Amit Varma]: And at different times, you have thought about how do I find the language for this?
[Amit Varma]: And what shapes that language?
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Interesting thoughts.
[Guest]: Very interesting questions.
[Guest]: Yeah, the reason why you were drawn to, if drawn is the word I want, the reason you were
[Guest]: attracted by or you found amusing that line about the rats was because it brought together
[Guest]: in a surprising relationship to things.
[Guest]: And yet, it held some truth.
[Guest]: It seemed to, and I think that, so one aspect I want to say there is that it is a way of
[Guest]: seeing which really is about metaphor, about, it is about seeing one thing in terms of another.
[Guest]: And that ability is something that I have seen, no one in my village back in Bihar might
[Guest]: necessarily be a writer or might even actually be literate.
[Guest]: My grandmother was not literate, but her language was more writerly than many of the writers
[Guest]: you will find at Jaipur Literature Festival, because her language was, in Hindi it is called
[Guest]: Alankrit Bhasha, meaning there was an element of adornment precisely because everything,
[Guest]: everything was expressed in terms of metaphor.
[Guest]: I would say to her, I will marry a white woman and I will come back, I will introduce you.
[Guest]: She would say, you know, from Bhojpuri, which was our language, she would say that my nose
[Guest]: is as flat as a bedbug's back.
[Amit Varma]: How would she say it in Bhojpuri?
[Guest]: To my mother, my grandmother would say.
[Guest]: I remember, I was again, our conversation is taking me back to my earlier memories,
[Guest]: but because I was struggling with words and language, again, as a teenager, studying in
[Guest]: Patna, going back to my village, I saw that he was moving very slowly.
[Guest]: So I asked him how he was.
[Guest]: And he said, meaning that, what can I tell you?
[Guest]: My forehead is burning like the pan on which the roti is baked or toasted or cooked.
[Guest]: And I thought, how quickly, how quickly and how vividly using an idiom that is drawn from
[Guest]: something close enough, he has, however, brought this alive.
[Guest]: So the economy, it is an economical evocation of a situation through a quick metaphor.
[Guest]: And I think, I feel I'm failing as a writer when I do not find a metaphor on every page
[Guest]: in my writing, just something that makes a quick and surprising.
[Guest]: The other thing about what you can't do that interested me immediately when you were talking
[Guest]: about it and it struck me was, when I was doing this period that I'm describing to you,
[Guest]: when I was searching for a language adequate to describe my surroundings, it was also,
[Guest]: it coincided with another discovery, which was my total inadequacy as an artist.
[Guest]: Because my parents would take me on the steamer from Patna, we would cross the river Ganga
[Guest]: and, you know, to go to our village, leaving my small home and getting on the boat would
[Guest]: always make me as if, would make me feel, there is such beauty, even just the flat expanse
[Guest]: of a brown muddy river with a single port and a red pennant would suggest to me, and
[Guest]: every time I attempted it, I failed.
[Guest]: There was no correspondence.
[Guest]: So my failure as an artist, what you can't do, I think further propelled me into the
[Guest]: art of writing.
[Guest]: But now, drawing interests me because having accomplished, writing has become easy to a
[Guest]: great extent, the taking up drawing is an entry into what I can't do, is an entry into
[Guest]: the art of the amateur.
[Guest]: And therefore, it is discovery, it doesn't matter if I fail.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter if I'm a, you know, an artist, what matters really is that I'm doing
[Guest]: it every day.
[Guest]: And I'm trying to do it as honestly as I can.
[Guest]: And as creatively, you know, not to be complacent about it, but instead to challenge oneself.
[Guest]: So this is really about how creativity is also about the art of the amateur, someone
[Guest]: who is trying something.
[Guest]: And I think writing or drawing or dance or who knows, even chess or poker at which you
[Guest]: excel, for us, those are amateur arts, you know, a seven-year-old can beat me, but who
[Guest]: cares?
[Guest]: Are you enjoying chess?
[Amit Varma]: Beautifully said.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm reminded of this quote in your book where, you know, in the blue book, you in
[Amit Varma]: your third section writing a novel, you quote William Maxwell as saying, quote, after 40
[Amit Varma]: years, what I came to care about most was not style, but the breadth of life.
[Amit Varma]: And that just seems to express what you just said that at least in your art, like in your
[Amit Varma]: writing, certainly you would be thinking deeply about craft and noticing imperfections.
[Amit Varma]: But at least in your art, it's that breadth of life.
[Amit Varma]: It's a man with red marks, doesn't have to be perfect, like Picasso would have done it
[Unknown]: or whatever.
[Guest]: Say, say, say, I mean, by the way, I'm so glad that the William Maxwell quote interested
[Guest]: you and attracted you.
[Guest]: I would place it among my, you know, top 10.
[Guest]: I think everyone should have, let's say, 10 books on their shelf, which they can return
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: And they should also have a list of at least 10 quotes, which they can always close, you
[Guest]: know, adhere to.
[Guest]: And that is one of them.
[Guest]: Not style, but the breadth of life.
[Guest]: To ask oneself,
[Guest]: just to catch something, you know.
[Guest]: And often, I remember, you know, Doordarshan came when I was a young man.
[Guest]: I mean, the television came to my life, into my life after the Asian Games.
[Guest]: And we were watching a movie.
[Guest]: And then Mrinal Sen was being interviewed.
[Guest]: And Mrinal Sen, either quoting himself, I mean, producing an original quote or quoting
[Guest]: someone else said, well, and I think he was in my mind at that time.
[Guest]: I saw him as different from, let's say, Satyajit Rai, who was a perfectionist.
[Guest]: Mrinal Sen said, I like imperfections.
[Guest]: Imperfections are the cracks through which poetry comes in.
[Guest]: Because then think,
[Guest]: with everything that will look improvised, but will nevertheless have something of an
[Guest]: immediacy.
[Guest]: Everything that will have a little bit of an imperfection will nevertheless be what
[Guest]: will make it come more alive.
[Guest]: So I've held that close to me too.
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: You know, earlier you spoke about how you'd go back to the village and how the language
[Amit Varma]: was for musical.
[Amit Varma]: And that reminded me of this anecdote in A Matter of Rats also, where you write about
[Amit Varma]: Ravish Kumar and how when Ravish Kumar was in college, he was jealous of a friend who
[Amit Varma]: could write a 20-page essay in English.
[Amit Varma]: So once for an exam, apparently he wrote, just in Hindi, he wrote, and the examiner
[Amit Varma]: came to his hostel and he asked for Ravish and he told everybody, quote,
[Amit Varma]: And I absolutely loved that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also sort of struck by something that you said in your book, where at one point,
[Amit Varma]: a magazine called Samkalin Janmat, which was being published from Patna, gave you a regular
[Amit Varma]: column called Letter from America.
[Amit Varma]: And you would write in English and they would publish it in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: And you were so moved that sometimes you would cry.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also given an example on the very next page of the Blue Book.
[Amit Varma]: These are pages 57 and 58.
[Amit Varma]: I love this book so much.
[Amit Varma]: I've noted down page numbers of every man who knows, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: You quote a short poem by your friend Alok Dhanwa, a Patna poet.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll read this out.
[Amit Varma]: And the poem goes,
[Amit Varma]: And you've attempted, you know, an English translation of this.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact is, the music of this, the simplicity, the lilt in it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I read this late last night and I was so excited.
[Amit Varma]: I sent this by WhatsApp to my writing students and I said,
[Amit Varma]: And I've discussed translation a lot with them in terms of,
[Amit Varma]: And this also has an effect on us who may not necessarily translate
[Amit Varma]: from one language to the other.
[Amit Varma]: But we are bilingual.
[Amit Varma]: A part of our lives is lived in one language naturally, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as it kind of comes naturally.
[Amit Varma]: And yet we are sort of writing in English where the sensibilities may be different.
[Amit Varma]: Like all languages have such particular characters, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Japanese and Korean can be so spare.
[Amit Varma]: Urdu and Punjabi can be so expressionistic and maximalistic.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't just translate one on one.
[Amit Varma]: You will miss these little kind of nuances.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in your own life, in a sense, you are always like,
[Amit Varma]: of course, there is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one view that any writing is an act of translation.
[Amit Varma]: You have thoughts in your head and you're translating them into the language
[Amit Varma]: in which they're coming out.
[Amit Varma]: But also a lot of your experiences are experienced in Hindi
[Amit Varma]: or experienced in Bhojpuri.
[Amit Varma]: And then you write about it and you're trying to capture the flavor and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What is the role that languages have played in your life?
[Amit Varma]: Like how much of what you are as a writer in English
[Amit Varma]: is shaped by what you have lived in Hindi and Bhojpuri?
[Amit Varma]: How much of a challenge is it?
[Guest]: Yeah, those are all such wonderful reflections.
[Guest]: What a beautiful poem, boss.
[Guest]: What a beautiful poem.
[Guest]: Rail, har bhale aadmi ki ek rail hoti hai,
[Guest]: jo maa ke ghar ki aur jaati hai,
[Guest]: siti bajati hui, dhua udati hui.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful.
[Guest]: I think of it and I think of my mother, you know,
[Guest]: I think of my mother waiting for me when the train from Delhi
[Guest]: during all those college days would bring me.
[Guest]: And sometimes because people always pull the chain
[Guest]: and stop the train earlier.
[Guest]: Sometimes I got out earlier and arrived home
[Guest]: by just crossing one fence.
[Guest]: I had to just climb over the fence
[Guest]: and I could drop into my garden into, you know,
[Guest]: because my home was very close to the railway line.
[Guest]: And to surprise my mother,
[Guest]: it filled me with tears when I read this poem
[Guest]: because I remembered my mother who has now died,
[Guest]: waiting for me and being delighted, you know,
[Guest]: by my early arrival and saying,
[Guest]: arey, tum humko firse surprise kar diye.
[Guest]: Amazing.
[Guest]: To answer your question,
[Guest]: I experienced the loss of Hindi when my grandmother died,
[Guest]: because I would at least after coming to the West,
[Guest]: kam se kam unko toh kahan, chutthi mein Hindi mein likhta tha,
[Guest]: so that someone in the village could read it out to her.
[Guest]: You know, she would stop my cousin of mine
[Guest]: or anyone else who was literate.
[Guest]: She would say, bhai, chutthi paddo.
[Guest]: So my, the letters that I wrote were in some ways
[Guest]: almost public letters because so many people heard it.
[Guest]: You know, and I felt after her death,
[Guest]: ki Hindi se woh naata chhuti gaya.
[Guest]: Now, the point you have mentioned from Samkali in Janma,
[Guest]: boss, I'm not lying.
[Guest]: I don't think, as I've said before,
[Guest]: I don't have any immodest expectations or ideas
[Guest]: about my writing.
[Guest]: Lekin jab ye log translate karke bhejte the,
[Guest]: mere toh, my, the hairs at the back of my neck
[Guest]: would stand sometimes because of the emotion they aroused,
[Guest]: because just that making it into Hindi
[Guest]: what I was saying made it so much more closer to my heart.
[Guest]: It became as if, it was somehow language became
[Guest]: at once more intimate and also eloquent, actually.
[Guest]: Toh, that's why, and yet the tragedy is,
[Guest]: you know, Manoj Vajpayee once said to me,
[Guest]: ki bhai, usko toh, when he was at Ramjas,
[Guest]: his roommates and others in the hostel
[Guest]: would make him read out the Times of India
[Guest]: because then they could laugh at him
[Guest]: because of the way he pronounced the words.
[Guest]: Teeke na?
[Guest]: So I, coming from a similar background,
[Guest]: you know, Manoj's village is just 40 minutes from mine.
[Guest]: Coming from a similar background,
[Guest]: and, you know, so too with Ravi.
[Guest]: She's also from Champaran, like me.
[Guest]: We would, the idea of English being this other thing
[Guest]: that we had to master was always a challenge.
[Guest]: You know, it was something I certainly set out to do.
[Guest]: I wanted to find a place for myself
[Guest]: in that landscape called English literature.
[Guest]: Teeke na?
[Guest]: Toh, and I think in various ways,
[Guest]: all these three figures we have talked about,
[Guest]: or these two other figures we have talked about,
[Guest]: have responded with great alarm.
[Guest]: You know, in case of Manoj Vajpayee,
[Guest]: he said, ki saare angreji mujhe bolwaage,
[Guest]: main bhai batata hu ki Hindi kaise bolna chahiye.
[Guest]: Main bhai batata hu ki Hindi kaise bolna chahiye.
[Guest]: And the enormous energy he brings on the screen
[Guest]: is that of someone who is coming up
[Guest]: through the trapdoor of history on the stage
[Guest]: and he's occupying the stage
[Guest]: and he's occupying the stage with great bravura, you know?
[Guest]: And with Ravish, I mean,
[Guest]: the way in which his presentation of news
[Guest]: achieves a quality of lyrical eloquence
[Guest]: is a marvelous achievement.
[Guest]: It makes him stand out from all those people
[Guest]: who are not only the purveyor of cheap or subservient news,
[Guest]: it marks him out as distinctive from all those people
[Guest]: who do not have a grip on language
[Guest]: and how it should reach the public ear.
[Guest]: In my case, I have to say that early on
[Guest]: when I was studying in Delhi,
[Guest]: all the debates would be about English, Indian English.
[Guest]: And I was, for a while, interested in things like,
[Guest]: you know, let's say, Raja Rao ki writing mein
[Guest]: bhai kis tarah se work kar raha hai?
[Guest]: Toh Nissi Mezekiel mein ek homeliness kis tarah se aati hai?
[Guest]: Toh what is Arun Kolhatkar doing in Jejuri?
[Guest]: But later on, thinking of,
[Guest]: it didn't seem so much of a preoccupation,
[Guest]: except I loved it when my first novel Home Products came out
[Guest]: and Raj Kamal Jha wrote to me and said ki,
[Guest]: boss, yeh toh kitab hai, when one reading it in English,
[Guest]: one thinks one is reading it in Hindi.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Toh mujhe laga ki, haan, boss, aapne dil ko chudiya mera, you know?
[Guest]: But that's what I also felt.
[Guest]: That's what I also felt. You know, there aren't many books,
[Guest]: you know, that is wonderful that so many more Indian writers
[Guest]: are so at ease with English that their books come out
[Guest]: without any degree of self-consciousness.
[Guest]: They are all in English, they write.
[Guest]: But they are also, in many ways, very urban and urbane.
[Guest]: I am, despite my stay abroad, I'm not urban and urbane in that way at all.
[Guest]: I feel ki ek dehati pan, ek chota sa gaon kahin mere andar basta hai, you know?
[Guest]: And therefore, I speak from that place.
[Guest]: And therefore, Raj Kamal's praise or observation really touched me.
[Guest]: And I think that what, there is an idea of a provincialism,
[Guest]: aur provincialism kahi kabhi negative term hoti hai,
[Guest]: toh there's an idea of a provincial articulation in one's language,
[Guest]: jo main abhi bhi practice karta hu.
[Guest]: So I cannot make it too, I cannot make it too, kya kahun?
[Guest]: I cannot make it very beautiful or very adorned or very chic or very fashionable.
[Guest]: Meri bhaasha mein hamesha kabhi, kya kahen?
[Guest]: Daal aur, jaise Dhirub Kumar ne ek baar kabhi shayad kaha tha
[Guest]: Lata Mangeshkar ke gaane ke baare mein,
[Guest]: isme se daal aur chawal ki bhu aati rahegi.
[Guest]: You know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: Ek something, a small town will always be there.
[Guest]: And that is true of language also.
[Amit Varma]: That's a beauty in your writing.
[Amit Varma]: It's a feature, not a bug, frankly.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I've noted down so many quotes in my notes from your writing
[Amit Varma]: because I was so struck by them.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about Ravish is also interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like there is a place in one of your books,
[Amit Varma]: I think A Matter of Rats, where you write about nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: And in that, you come up with a credo for nonfiction writers,
[Amit Varma]: where you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: to show on the page that despite what you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: there is another story waiting in the wings, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I think when Ravish delivers news, that's exactly what he is doing.
[Amit Varma]: The news he delivers are the same events that everyone else will deliver.
[Amit Varma]: But nobody, you know, delivers the same news, which is brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm also sort of struck by this notion of English as a language,
[Amit Varma]: which must be learned, which must be mastered.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in my case, because of the kind of privileged upbringing I had
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, English was always sort of natural to me.
[Amit Varma]: It felt like my language.
[Amit Varma]: You know, with other languages, I might have struggled.
[Amit Varma]: And during my writing classes, one of the participants wrote to me,
[Amit Varma]: and she said that, look, here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: The problem is that my first language is Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to learn English.
[Amit Varma]: I'm passionate about it, but it is hard work.
[Amit Varma]: And we started having a discussion on that.
[Amit Varma]: I had heard this beautiful interview of Jhumpa Lahiri
[Amit Varma]: when she appeared on the show Conversations with Tyler.
[Amit Varma]: Jhumpa, of course, learned Italian from scratch
[Amit Varma]: and then wrote a book in it, right?
[Amit Varma]: And in that interview, she pointed to a writer called Agatha Christophe,
[Amit Varma]: whom you must have read.
[Amit Varma]: And Agatha Christophe was, I think, a Hungarian writer or something.
[Amit Varma]: And because of the war or events in Europe,
[Amit Varma]: she shifted to France when she was 21, 22.
[Amit Varma]: And she started learning French when she was 21, 22, basically,
[Amit Varma]: and wrote a brilliant series of novels in it,
[Amit Varma]: especially one called The Notebook Trilogy, three novels together.
[Amit Varma]: And I was just blown away by the starkness and power of the writing.
[Amit Varma]: You also begin to see how she stripped it down to its elemental bits
[Amit Varma]: and made it all her own.
[Amit Varma]: And when I pointed out this to the student who had asked me this,
[Amit Varma]: she actually got The Notebook Trilogy from Agatha Christophe
[Amit Varma]: and she started copying it, paragraphs, you know, in her own handwriting
[Amit Varma]: just to get a sense of the rhythm and the lay and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought what often happens,
[Amit Varma]: and when I give writing prompts to my students also,
[Amit Varma]: I put in all kinds of restrictions,
[Amit Varma]: like don't use multisyllable words, don't use adjectives and adverbs,
[Amit Varma]: the whole point not being to impose a sense of values,
[Amit Varma]: but the whole point being to build that mindfulness
[Amit Varma]: where you look at language so closely.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, I would imagine that because it is a language
[Amit Varma]: that you're setting out to master, as you said,
[Amit Varma]: that you are looking at it more closely,
[Amit Varma]: not taking it for granted like someone like me would,
[Amit Varma]: where I just read it and, you know, I read it for the story
[Amit Varma]: or I read it for whatever, but you're looking at it kind of deeper.
[Amit Varma]: So over the years, can you tell me about this process
[Amit Varma]: that when did you start looking at writing in that mindful way
[Amit Varma]: where you're noticing craft, you're noticing all the tricks of the trade,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, how rhythm is built, how all this is done,
[Amit Varma]: and how, you know, your own writing kind of evolved?
[Amit Varma]: Who were the early writers whose craft you looked at?
[Amit Varma]: Who were the people you identified with?
[Amit Varma]: Who were the people you liked and said,
[Amit Varma]: hey, that's great, but I can't do that?
[Unknown]: How was it?
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Guest]: One thing that happened when I would go back to my village in Champaran,
[Guest]: I'm talking when I was seven or eight or nine, for example.
[Guest]: One of the things that happened within hours and certainly in days
[Guest]: would be that I would be called in front of an assembly of male elders
[Guest]: and someone would give me a line in Hindi and say,
[Guest]: I'll say it in English.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Before the train arrived, I left the station.
[Guest]: This was a more complicated formulation.
[Guest]: Let's say my uncle, who was an advocate in Moti Hari,
[Guest]: would offer this line, and then I would perform by translating.
[Guest]: And then people, none of the audience knew English,
[Guest]: but just to hear these words out was the first lesson
[Guest]: into how you are supposed to be a master.
[Guest]: You are supposed to be a master if you could translate a sentence of English.
[Guest]: Now, that exercise, of course, didn't interest me too long.
[Guest]: It was really the physical description.
[Guest]: I can't tell you how exciting it was.
[Guest]: My teachers were very unimaginative and dull when I went to college to study in Delhi.
[Guest]: So I would often go instead to libraries like Sahitya Akademi Library, etc.
[Guest]: On those days on which I was not trying to actually have a
[Guest]: wills, niddy cut and some tea with one of the girls who would sometimes talk to me on campus.
[Guest]: So the days when that didn't happen, there was no such plan.
[Guest]: So I would get down and it was a great discovery.
[Guest]: It was a great discovery, like Ved Mehta or Kushwant Singh, whom I mentioned before,
[Guest]: Dom Moraes or Arun Kolatkar, because they were describing our own streets.
[Guest]: Just like Delhi's city.
[Guest]: A description of that.
[Guest]: So I got a kind of language.
[Guest]: I would think that, yes, just the idea that I am sitting,
[Guest]: let's say if I'm sitting in Sahitya Akademi Library in Delhi
[Guest]: and there was a description of, I don't know, Aurangzeb Road,
[Guest]: which I'm told has now been changed into something else.
[Guest]: There would be a frizzle.
[Guest]: Just like the description of the pillars of the shops of Connaught Place,
[Guest]: I would think that I'm getting a sense.
[Guest]: I'm getting a sense of how to map my place in this world.
[Guest]: So those were really wonderful.
[Guest]: I remember one evening, I again must be 17, 18, I can't remember, 20.
[Guest]: I was listening to a koel, Garmi Ka Din Tha.
[Guest]: I thought, if I write a few lines, can I evoke this feeling?
[Guest]: And I wrote it and immediately mailed it to Kushwant Singh.
[Guest]: And a few days later, a letter from him arrived,
[Guest]: said very nice, very evocative.
[Guest]: This was the word he used, continue writing or something like that.
[Guest]: You know, you're very young.
[Guest]: Someone like that says that, you know, you think, okay, I'm doing something right.
[Guest]: So those were the great influences.
[Guest]: Now, at that time, and then I was not able to get a place in the hostel in Delhi.
[Guest]: But such is the generosity of young people.
[Guest]: Up to, you know, at old age, you become more cantankerous.
[Guest]: I was allowed to sleep on the bed, on the floor with my own bedding.
[Guest]: There was a bedding-cum-holder in another friend's room.
[Guest]: And he had a small autobiography of Naipaul.
[Guest]: You know, it's called like a fragment of an autobiography.
[Guest]: And that was a wonderful discovery for me.
[Guest]: After that, I started reading Naipaul.
[Guest]: And he was a great influence to, again,
[Guest]: because he was giving a language to something that was familiar.
[Guest]: And if you read something like A Million Mutinies Now,
[Guest]: the idea of observing cities and people and places in India
[Guest]: is a great manual for acquiring a vocabulary of looking and describing.
[Guest]: But people like J.M. Kudsia, or more, you know, journalists,
[Guest]: for journalistic sort of a thing, Joan Didion,
[Guest]: or for a slightly more psychoanalytic take on the self
[Guest]: and an ability to criticise the profession of journalism itself, Janet Malcolm.
[Guest]: You have to become a bit more theoretical and sophisticated, Susan Sontag.
[Guest]: All these names were very influential for me.
[Guest]: Later, you know, with age and after publishing,
[Guest]: writers became also, you know, my friends.
[Guest]: And so then it became a different kind of circle.
[Guest]: So, you know, people like Arundhati Roy or Kiran Dasai,
[Guest]: Pankaj Mishra, Amit Choudhury,
[Guest]: Amit Choudhury, these are people who have had great influence, I think,
[Guest]: because I feel as if I'm in conversation with them, you know.
[Guest]: So that, am I answering your question?
[Guest]: Ki jaise ki, kaise tarah se evolution hui?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Aur bolo toh main bataunga, kuch aur uspe.
[Amit Varma]: I want to double click on a couple of things here.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, ek aside lete hain.
[Amit Varma]: Aapne postcard ka mention kiya, pehle bhi aapne mention kiya ki,
[Amit Varma]: you know, aap khate bhejte the.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember this recent conversation I had
[Amit Varma]: with a mutual friend of ours, Chandra Haas Choudhury.
[Amit Varma]: And Chandra Haas, as you would know, has a habit of writing these
[Amit Varma]: delightfully charming emails, jaise pehle dinon mein khat likhte the.
[Guest]: No, no, no, he doesn't write anything like that to me.
[Guest]: He does that only for you.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, I think I've got him into trouble.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, so he sent me this delightful long email,
[Amit Varma]: you know, with memories and with this and that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, okay, I remember writing and receiving
[Amit Varma]: such letters in the 80s and 90s.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi aisa kuch nahi hota hai.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi email mein hota hai.
[Amit Varma]: Poora matter of fact hota hai.
[Amit Varma]: It's all transactional.
[Amit Varma]: That, oh, what date are you in Delhi?
[Amit Varma]: When are you in Bombay?
[Amit Varma]: Are you okay?
[Amit Varma]: I hope you're better now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeh sab chalta hai.
[Amit Varma]: But this whole thing of reminiscing that you remember,
[Amit Varma]: we were in Pune and we had samosas at that place and they were such a,
[Amit Varma]: they are the best samosas I've ever had and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Toh uska ek sort of charm hai of that kind of communication.
[Amit Varma]: And we kind of got talking about this because I pointed this out to him that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this is something that I actually miss.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't know I missed it till,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he sent me that beautiful letter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in your book also, there are traces of this in the blue book.
[Amit Varma]: For example, Cheryl Strait, you reproduce a postcard that she has sent
[Amit Varma]: and you are sort of communicating by postcard as well in a couple of places,
[Amit Varma]: which is interesting because when you sit down to write like that,
[Amit Varma]: and especially aap pen aur paper leke you sit down
[Amit Varma]: and you're writing a letter out by hand,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that there is a tariff to that.
[Amit Varma]: There is a consideration to what you are writing.
[Amit Varma]: And again, like we spoke about writing in the self,
[Amit Varma]: you are thinking in that moment, you are reflecting,
[Amit Varma]: there is reflection happening.
[Amit Varma]: And that is shaping you because you are writing like that.
[Amit Varma]: And that is something that goes missing when everything is WhatsApp messages,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, emails and everybody is immediately within reach,
[Amit Varma]: so everything becomes functional.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you maybe you become a different person,
[Amit Varma]: because that self-reflection, that shaping isn't happening.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote an essay once on about the form that one uses
[Amit Varma]: shapes the content that one produces,
[Amit Varma]: and that changes the person that you are.
[Amit Varma]: Like just these long conversations,
[Amit Varma]: because I have four or five hour conversations,
[Amit Varma]: I am forced to listen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm forced to digress.
[Amit Varma]: I'm for, you know, me and my guests will happily go into
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of little rabbit holes on the side like you and I are.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that changes, the form changes the content,
[Amit Varma]: like a half an hour interview would be very snap, snap, staccato,
[Amit Varma]: sawal poochiye yeh book ka idea aapke paas kaise aaya,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: It's shallow, it's very different.
[Amit Varma]: Something like this, the form shapes the content and shapes me.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think in the course of doing this show,
[Amit Varma]: I've become a better listener, more empathetic, more whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So you've sort of lived through so many changes in form.
[Amit Varma]: Jab aap pen aur paper kar rahe ho, uske baad aap laptop pe kar rahe ho,
[Amit Varma]: even the way that you drew then,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, you said you used to fail
[Amit Varma]: when you were drawing historical figures in class,
[Amit Varma]: which is why you were drawn to writing.
[Amit Varma]: And later, you know, the way that you draw and you paint now,
[Amit Varma]: the way that we live our lives.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: First of all, I'm so glad you mentioned why your show is so long.
[Guest]: Kyunki kisi ne, mere ek dost ne mazaak kiya,
[Guest]: ki bhaiye toh Sholay se bhi aur lamba hai, is longer than Sholay.
[Guest]: I'm glad that you mentioned it because every work of art,
[Guest]: I believe, and I tell my students this,
[Guest]: should also tell the viewer or the reader how it should be consumed.
[Guest]: In other words, it should explain its own logic at some way,
[Guest]: in a subtle way, but it should.
[Guest]: And what you have done, very cleverly, I think,
[Guest]: is explain ki bhaiya, why the hell are we talking for three hours or four hours?
[Guest]: Yeh jugal bandi itni der tak kyon chal rahe hai?
[Guest]: Because people are going to improvise
[Guest]: and they're going to draw upon their training
[Guest]: and their discipline to extract something in a rigorous way for a while
[Guest]: and see where fate or time or art leads them.
[Guest]: That's what we are doing.
[Guest]: So good job talking about the form.
[Guest]: When you were talking about the letters and the letters being now dropping out as a practice,
[Guest]: my first thought actually was all those books that I have read,
[Guest]: which are letters written by people and which I've enjoyed so much,
[Guest]: is now going to be lost, you know.
[Guest]: Robert Lovell or Elizabeth Bishop.
[Guest]: Toh Nehru ji apni beti ko likh rahe hain chithiyan.
[Guest]: Gandhi likh rahe hain these little notes,
[Guest]: but they are so, they bring back history.
[Guest]: They show the dynamics.
[Guest]: The other day someone posted on Facebook,
[Guest]: I saw a letter written by Subhash Bose to Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Guest]: I was like, oh my God, yeah, bade hi jeevant kahaniya waha pe hain
[Guest]: and that we have lost.
[Guest]: I am, you know, I don't know about you.
[Guest]: Are you going to, I'm thinking that I'm actually going to use emails.
[Guest]: I try sometimes to use screen grabs.
[Guest]: Usi din, because we are talking about Blue Book,
[Guest]: mujhe ek note aaya from a writer I admire a lot, Z.D. Smith.
[Guest]: Toh maine apne editor ko kaha hai ki bhai, isko toh mai agle wale book mein,
[Guest]: usko maan lejiye yellow book kahete hain, usme jaroor dalunga.
[Guest]: Theek hai?
[Guest]: Toh yeh aapko bhi mai sunata hoon.
[Guest]: This is our first presentation.
[Guest]: Chalo.
[Guest]: Usne likha hai ki bhai, I love your Blue Book.
[Guest]: I meant to read a page of it late last night,
[Guest]: and instead I read the whole thing
[Guest]: and then suffered on the school run this morning.
[Guest]: A lovely thing.
[Guest]: Theek hai?
[Guest]: Toh maine usko jawab mein likha hai, ki aisa hai,
[Guest]: ki mera doosra, ek hamari, there's a mutual friend of ours called Teju Kaur,
[Guest]: toh usko, usse mazaak meri hamesha hoti hai ki bhai,
[Guest]: kyuki mai usse bada hoon, jistar se I'm older than you,
[Guest]: main usse hamisha hai, kata hoon ki bhai,
[Guest]: ugar koi bhi achi baat kehta hai,
[Guest]: if I write a vicious letter about a dean,
[Guest]: or if I write something about a writer that both of us find obnoxious,
[Guest]: he will say, or I will say,
[Guest]: ki bhai mere funeral mein, mere memorial mein,
[Guest]: he will read it aloud.
[Guest]: Theek hai?
[Guest]: Toh we have a whole list of those things, jo padhega.
[Guest]: Toh maine us din ZD ko likha hai ki bhai,
[Guest]: Teju and I have this constant back and forth
[Guest]: about what he's going to read out at my memorial.
[Guest]: We joke about all kinds of things, including my angry letters,
[Guest]: but I think I'll leave instructions in my will about this message from you.
[Guest]: Theek hai?
[Guest]: Aur phir maine kaha, I think he might want you to tape it on your phone
[Guest]: and send it before the music starts in the Vassar Chapel.
[Guest]: Aur usko maine hyperlink kar diya,
[Guest]: because the music I wanted her to know was going to be this
[Guest]: from this Hungarian composer, Henrikh Gorecki.
[Guest]: Aur phir maine usko bracket mein likha,
[Guest]: you can see that we have given some thought to this.
[Guest]: Toh ZD ne udhar se jabab diya ki bhai,
[Guest]: my phone record, my phone cannot record anything.
[Guest]: I'll just have to come in person.
[Guest]: Theek hai?
[Guest]: Tab yeh exchange, toh mujhe bada delightful sa laga.
[Guest]: Isliye maine socha hai ki main toh isko agli baali kitab mein daal dunga.
[Guest]: In the same way as in the blue book,
[Guest]: this whole exchange I have with Ian Jack
[Guest]: about what's, you know, should I do art?
[Guest]: Should I not do art?
[Guest]: Why is writing the more difficult enterprise?
[Guest]: And then what sentences to keep and what sentences to remove?
[Guest]: Mujhe bada revealing sa laga, so I put that in.
[Guest]: So I am certainly, in the spirit of what you have been saying,
[Guest]: I do want to actually preserve.
[Guest]: Even though you're right about the form,
[Guest]: often these, it makes the writing so much more truncated and brutally swift.
[Guest]: I want to preserve some of these exchanges and make it a document of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to double click on the Ian Jack conversation
[Amit Varma]: that you had with him in your book, which I loved.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, I did this recent episode on the debates of Jawaharlal Nehru
[Amit Varma]: with Rupur Daman Singh and Adil Hussain.
[Amit Varma]: I've written this excellent book about Nehru's four debates
[Amit Varma]: with Mohammad Iqbal, Jinnah, Sardar Patel and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee.
[Amit Varma]: And it is incredible.
[Amit Varma]: These people are writing letters to each other
[Amit Varma]: or sometimes replying to each other through columns and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the erudition is mind-blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Like Nehru jail mein baith ke chitthi likh raha hai, where he's, from memory,
[Amit Varma]: he's coming up with all these quotes and drawing all these connections.
[Amit Varma]: And it is so lucid and clear.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Jinnah is not at his best in this particular exchange.
[Amit Varma]: But if you read other things by him, it's much better.
[Amit Varma]: And one thinks that these people are constantly in dialogue with each other.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they are deepening their own thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes a difference.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one might agree or disagree.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with a lot of what Nehru did.
[Amit Varma]: I disagree strongly with a lot of it.
[Amit Varma]: But there's an engagement with ideas, with opposing ideas,
[Amit Varma]: which somehow I feel in modern times is kind of missing.
[Amit Varma]: But the part about your conversation with Ian Jack
[Amit Varma]: that I wanted to double click on and ask about
[Amit Varma]: is at one point when he replies to something you have written,
[Amit Varma]: he says that, you know, if novels were roads,
[Amit Varma]: his favorite road sign would be danger, imagination at work, right?
[Amit Varma]: And part of what this seems to imply is that the world is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: You see it and you see it and you write it.
[Amit Varma]: Don't add anything to it.
[Amit Varma]: Don't embellish.
[Amit Varma]: That's how I'm interpreting his words.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm thinking that, you know, when I was much younger,
[Amit Varma]: I, of course, I never heeded that sign.
[Amit Varma]: Because young writers tend to go overboard.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, he was saying that this is a sign that you should watch out for.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one balance this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I talk about this with my students also a lot,
[Amit Varma]: that sometimes you want to, you know, in Naipaul's words,
[Amit Varma]: avoid the abstract, embrace the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: You want to make something vivid.
[Amit Varma]: But in the process of making something vivid, you can go overboard.
[Amit Varma]: And you may not have the discipline to murder your darlings as the phrase goes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how has this been in your own writing?
[Amit Varma]: Because when you are learning to write the way that you did looking at craft,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the writing itself is an act.
[Amit Varma]: It is performative.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's not just a means to an end, as all good writing should be.
[Amit Varma]: But it is also for that moment and end in itself for you, if for no one else.
[Amit Varma]: So how have you evolved over the years in that process?
[Amit Varma]: And I must put in the caveat here is that I love all of your writing,
[Amit Varma]: from your early books to the blue book, which is just beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: But you have a better inside view of how your writing has evolved
[Amit Varma]: and how you think about all of this, the writer's role in all of this.
[Amit Varma]: Because at one level, you want to be faithful to the world you write about.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, the world you write about exists only for you.
[Amit Varma]: You are seeing it, it is imbued with the personal.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one deal with all this?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, when I came from Patna to Delhi,
[Guest]: when I was, I don't know, 16, 17, whatever,
[Guest]: one of the books, one of these thin booklets I discovered was called Words Are Important.
[Guest]: Toh usse, it was a sort of a vocabulary acquisition ka tariqa tha wo.
[Guest]: And I have to say, the other thing I was doing was ki ek notebook rehti thi.
[Guest]: So if I was reading a novel, let's say,
[Guest]: I remember reading Thomas Hardy and noting down the word lucent.
[Guest]: I think it was Tess of the D'Urbervilles or word lucent maine seekha, L-U-C-E-N-T.
[Guest]: Usi tarah word sanguine.
[Guest]: The distressing thing about this acquisition of new words, however,
[Guest]: was that I wanted to use them rather than,
[Guest]: you know, the sky was always the cerulean sky rather than a blue sky.
[Guest]: Aur badi dikkat thi us baad se.
[Guest]: I flinch every time I'm reading something my students say.
[Guest]: And I see that the emphasis is falling on the use of a more extravagant vocabulary.
[Guest]: Munhi lagta hai, this person is missing something.
[Guest]: They're missing the word for the trees, which is, by the way, a cliche,
[Guest]: which should not be used.
[Guest]: But anyway, point is.
[Guest]: So my passage from there to something more serious has again been a journey.
[Guest]: Now, do I agree with Ian?
[Guest]: Well, Kiran Dasai, who has given a nice blurb to this book,
[Guest]: did write to me and say, I do not agree with Ian Jack.
[Guest]: You should paint, of course.
[Guest]: You should draw.
[Guest]: You should do everything.
[Guest]: Ma parso chaute roz yahan pe, I went for a walk with Ian Jack
[Guest]: and we were talking about these things, you know, because I was,
[Guest]: you know, he comes from a working class background.
[Guest]: So there is a suspicion of everything, of anything that is embellished.
[Guest]: And I understand where that comes from.
[Guest]: What that also means is seeing the, you know, you used the right phrase.
[Guest]: You said seeing the world as it is.
[Guest]: You know, it is a certain emphasis on a certain emphasis on an unembarrassed
[Guest]: plain speaking and using that plain speaking to get to something incisive and probing.
[Guest]: And he does that well.
[Guest]: He does that very well.
[Guest]: I teach, in fact, I'm next week teaching an essay of his called Unsteady People,
[Guest]: which is wonderful.
[Guest]: I think I want to be just a little, well, let me tell you a story about Ian.
[Guest]: I don't know whether you've read an essay of mine called Pyre, which is about my mother's death.
[Guest]: I was writing it for Ian because he was editing a special issue of Granta on India.
[Guest]: There was a little episode in that, in what I submitted to him, which he wanted to cut,
[Guest]: and he did cut it.
[Guest]: It was an episode where I had said how my mother was becoming frail or debilitated
[Guest]: for several years before her death.
[Guest]: And I described how we had visited a public monument in some part of Gujarat or Rajasthan,
[Guest]: and my mother needed to pee.
[Guest]: She needed to urinate.
[Guest]: And I couldn't find a bathroom.
[Guest]: So in one particular room of this big abandoned place, I felt it was abandoned, I said to her,
[Guest]: I'll stand at the staircase.
[Guest]: She was getting desperate.
[Guest]: I said, you just be here.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter.
[Guest]: Near that hole.
[Guest]: And when I came down with her, there were two or three men standing near a pawn shop,
[Guest]: and they were looking at us, the wetness on the wall above there.
[Guest]: You understand?
[Guest]: And I said, in that piece I had written, that this was very embarrassing to me, and I don't
[Guest]: know how much, much more humiliating and embarrassing it was to my mother.
[Guest]: You know, but this is what mortality means.
[Guest]: You're seeing death.
[Guest]: You're seeing your body weakened.
[Guest]: And I said, it was very interesting to me.
[Guest]: I had written in that piece that on the night, when I was sleeping beside my mother's body,
[Guest]: which we were going to cremate in the morning, a dream came to me in which a man had said
[Guest]: something humiliating at a wedding in a public place about my mother, and that I wrestled
[Guest]: him to the ground.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: I gave you a small statement.
[Guest]: Ian said, you have to take this out, because this is, you're going to embarrass your reader.
[Guest]: You're going to embarrass your reader, and the responsibility of the writer, he said
[Guest]: the responsibility of the writer is to never embarrass his reader.
[Guest]: I think one should bear one's heart, and one should be as honest as possible in one's writing.
[Guest]: And this was my attempt to be honest about what had been embarrassing about my mother's decline,
[Guest]: and how I felt it internally, inside myself.
[Guest]: So I think he's coming out of a certain kind of an English tradition of not revealing too
[Guest]: much, of having a certain honesty.
[Guest]: But that honesty is expressed in terms of avoiding extravagance, of being happy with
[Guest]: bread and potatoes, instead of going in for some fancy cereal.
[Guest]: Muesli nahi khaana bhai, bhai main porridge nahi khaaya hoona, that sort of a feeling.
[Guest]: It is coming out of that ethos.
[Guest]: And so, I think one has to be true to oneself.
[Guest]: And if you're true to yourself, you will find a form that does adequate justice to your
[Guest]: writing, you know.
[Guest]: And in that case, I cannot hold it against someone.
[Guest]: Let's say Martin Amis, born in a family held up for its literary achievement, then goes
[Guest]: on to do something that is like fireworks in the sky, bhai usko, you know, that's his
[Guest]: inheritance almost, it seems to me.
[Guest]: He can do that.
[Guest]: Main kahin aur se aaya hoon, I have to do something else.
[Guest]: You know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: It's not a point so much about accepting one's station, because I don't think it is one is
[Guest]: better or the other, but of being true, what feels natural to you.
[Guest]: Having said all this, I must say, shayad main ek kitab mein bhi bahat likhi hoon ki, I always
[Guest]: also feel ki jaise wo aap tennis match dekh rahe hain na, the commentators will never,
[Guest]: wo jo soccer mein, the South American commentator who says goal, wo nahi hoga.
[Guest]: In Wimbledon, it will be.
[Guest]: Now we'll have to see if Christina can achieve.
[Guest]: It will be a struggle after her three double falls.
[Guest]: She has had three double falls.
[Guest]: Venus had only had one.
[Guest]: That hush in these posh places on in these games, which is a very controlled voice.
[Guest]: So how to avoid the hush that often falls on me when I'm trying to be the English writer
[Guest]: and how to embrace an identity of someone who comes from a place where when the Bollywood song,
[Guest]: when the song comes and you're sitting in the theater, men will tear their shirts off and they
[Guest]: will sing, you know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: Toh main toh yahaan par is gesture mein apni earphone bhi nikal diya, magar you see what I'm saying.
[Guest]: Manoj bhai would accept ki haan, Bitya mein jab wo gaana aata tha na, toh hum log toh apna salak kameez bhaad dete the.
[Guest]: Yalla! First day, first show.
[Guest]: So that exuberance also, I must say that I feel that I should embrace in my writing
[Guest]: that kind of wild energy too, lekin hamisha se ho nahi paata hai, ya chad uss tarah se aata nahi.
[Guest]: So it is not so much finding a balance to answer your question.
[Guest]: It is just a back and forth in a little dance where you're trying to retain while doing,
[Guest]: while achieving some unnatural postures, you're still trying to retain your balance.
[Amit Varma]: No, you could not have answered this question more beautifully.
[Amit Varma]: And thanks for sharing that passage, which, you know, Ian Jack cut out because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as an editor, that would have delighted me the most, that particular passage, because I think
[Amit Varma]: it really does get to the heart of mortality and how vulnerable it makes you and how helpless
[Amit Varma]: it makes you. And it's just, it really kind of speaks to me.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the larger answer there is that you have to be authentic to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: which is what I tell my students, I tell creators of all types,
[Amit Varma]: that you have to be authentic to yourself. And even the Englishman who's giving the
[Amit Varma]: restrained commentaries, Wimbledon is at some level being authentic to himself.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like Ishiguro is captured in Remains of the Day, for example, or is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that classic sort of restraint, you know, and whatever it takes to be authentic
[Amit Varma]: to yourself, you do that. Now, that kind of brings this deeper question, because I think
[Amit Varma]: the biggest hurdle to writing, and in fact, a hurdle in life itself, is this ever present
[Amit Varma]: anxiety of what other people will think of us. We are social creatures, we crave validation.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, in a sense, we are all being performative. In certain ways,
[Amit Varma]: we are being performative, even to ourselves. You may go from a small town to a big city or
[Amit Varma]: from India to abroad somewhere. And you are conscious of that, how am I being perceived
[Amit Varma]: and you're being performative, and sometimes a face becomes a mask. And in trying to project
[Amit Varma]: yourself as something which you would like to be seen as, you lose a little part of yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what you have done, and this is so evident in all of your writing, in the flavours of the
[Amit Varma]: language that you capture in the places that you visit, is that you haven't done this.
[Amit Varma]: But what was this process like? And this was really an anxiety that I only noted in myself,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, when I reached middle age, when I said, when I realised, boss, we spend too much
[Amit Varma]: of our lives paralysed by this anxiety, when the truth is no one gives a shit about anyone else.
[Amit Varma]: We've all got our heads up our own ass, no one is thinking, what did he write,
[Amit Varma]: screenshot it, mock him on Twitter. Actually, that happens a lot on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's such a pointless anxiety and something you have to move past.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process for you like, you were a small town kid who goes to a big city,
[Amit Varma]: you were a desi kid who goes abroad. And this must have been an ever present anxiety,
[Amit Varma]: it must have at some level shaped your writing. Even when you begin writing, there is that Indian
[Amit Varma]: writer in English thing happening, there are those big role models, even you I'm sure would
[Amit Varma]: like a fat advance, maybe not consciously, but the thought must enter, what kind of book will
[Amit Varma]: get an advance, so on and so forth. Tell me about this anxiety, has it played a role in your life?
[Amit Varma]: How have you overcome it? When did you begin to see it for what it is?
[Guest]: I've not overcome it, boss. I still crave good reviews, and get angry or disappointed or disgusted
[Guest]: with those that do not offer praise. But you're now comfortable in your own skin.
[Guest]: Right, right, right. Just in the interest of honesty, I just wanted to say,
[Guest]: I haven't transcended that much. Have you watched that Chaitanya Tamhane film, The Disciple?
[Amit Varma]: No, I haven't watched The Disciple yet, oddly, because Court is my favorite
[Amit Varma]: Indian film of the last 20 years.
[Amit Varma]: It's an amazing film.
[Guest]: I'm trying to link it also with your last question about being authentic.
[Guest]: You think at one level, you know, Chaitanya Tamhane is someone I don't know.
[Guest]: He seems a young auteur who is full of both promise and achievement, but I'd love to know him.
[Guest]: If anyone is listening to this, please tell him that I admire him immensely.
[Guest]: You cannot watch that movie, whether we're talking about the Court, but also certainly
[Guest]: more importantly, I want to talk about The Disciple, without thinking that here are characters
[Guest]: who are being authentic to themselves.
[Guest]: Like in the Court, the singer presents the whole truth of his soul in his words.
[Guest]: It is an unswerving arc towards his fated destiny.
[Guest]: It's an amazing thing.
[Guest]: It's like it's as firm and as shiny as a sword being swung in the air, you know, it's just
[Unknown]: there.
[Guest]: So you sense that of the characters, but also you sense that of the artist behind the camera,
[Guest]: that this person is trying both to express something of his own, what he's seeking in
[Guest]: life, what he's seeking in art, and he's trying to shape who he is through this expression.
[Guest]: So my main anxiety is not so much about the advance, which I don't get anyway, or about
[Guest]: the reviews, which are not always good anyway, or about finding admirers.
[Guest]: So it's great to have someone who has read you as sympathetically as Amit Verma has.
[Guest]: It is about doing what that guy is doing, yeah?
[Guest]: The one who sits and practices and finds himself distracted, but returns to it because he thinks
[Guest]: this is what is the path.
[Guest]: I thought, and you know, nothing, nothing absorbs me.
[Guest]: And this is one way of answering your question.
[Guest]: Nothing absorbs me as the story of this seeking of the self, and the seeking of the self through
[Guest]: art, because you can't do it by industry.
[Guest]: So instead, how to find and write a poem, or a story, or a novel that will achieve,
[Guest]: let's say, what I saw someone doing with great austerity even in the disciple, to the acquisition
[Unknown]: of the right.
[Guest]: And I did not know, you know, like, like when in the, well, you haven't watched the disciple.
[Guest]: In a disciple, there's a scene, for example, where the teacher says he's dissatisfied with
[Guest]: how the boy is singing.
[Guest]: Now, for someone unschooled in music like me, I do not know what is going wrong.
[Guest]: But I appreciated the rigor of the master saying this is wrong.
[Guest]: And I appreciated the enthusiasm and dedication of the student who says, okay, let me try
[Guest]: this again.
[Guest]: And it was amazing to me.
[Guest]: So the search for art, or the search for a form that articulates whatever it is I'm looking
[Guest]: for, or seem to have found at that point.
[Guest]: And what I can say about the world, that is how I have maintained, or at least found a
[Guest]: place of comfort in today's world.
[Amit Varma]: And do you look back on your older writing, like whenever you write something, what you
[Amit Varma]: have written at that moment is a reflection of yourself, right?
[Amit Varma]: And when you look back on your older writing, do you look at it differently?
[Amit Varma]: Do you sometimes say, which of course, I think all writers go through.
[Amit Varma]: I everything I've written before makes me cringe.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, you've been accomplished for a very long time.
[Amit Varma]: So do you look back at your older writing and think sometimes that this was written
[Amit Varma]: by a different person?
[Amit Varma]: Like how different is the 22 year old Amitabh Kumar from the person that you are today?
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps a person 18 years ago, when we first met or whenever?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: How different are these people?
[Amit Varma]: What do you see when you look back on yourself?
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel?
[Guest]: You know, when I first really thought, started thinking of myself as a writer, I was writing
[Guest]: poems against the border patrol and in America, and they were very angry poems.
[Guest]: And I do cringe a little bit.
[Guest]: But I also am quite taken by that person who seems eager to speak in such an unfettered
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: My first book was called Passport Photos, that was a very, you know, coming to this
[Guest]: country was a transformative experience and the encounters that I had and the feeling
[Guest]: of being a marginal man.
[Guest]: And I thought, that's a very humiliating experience.
[Guest]: You know, when you go to ask for a visa and the way they used to treat you, at least they
[Guest]: used to treat you.
[Guest]: I don't know how they happen now.
[Guest]: And I used to think, when you look at your passport, the guy at the border asks you a
[Guest]: few questions, again, in a very blunt way, have I ever got a chance to tell my story?
[Guest]: So if I look, if I open my passport, it says name, place of birth, date of birth, and then
[Guest]: I have a passport.
[Guest]: I have a passport, I have a passport, I have a passport, I have a passport, I have a passport.
[Guest]: My passport, it says name, place of birth, date of birth, identifying marks.
[Guest]: What is the story I can tell about these?
[Guest]: So everything that is on my passport, you know, on the first page, those are the chapters
[Guest]: of that book.
[Guest]: Or passport photo, the photo I've used there is one of, you see an old woman, and then
[Guest]: when you turn the page, you see the photo of that same woman, the same photo, except
[Guest]: now it is a bigger frame and you see that she has her arm raised in protest.
[Guest]: And it is, she's a protester from Bhopal, outside the Supreme Court office in Delhi.
[Guest]: And I was trying to tell the story, what is the story that the passport does not tell?
[Guest]: And what is my book, passport photos?
[Guest]: What is the story that it is telling?
[Guest]: In other words, how to take the form given by the state and how to alter it?
[Guest]: My passport does not ask me, what is my language, but it is in language that I declare my independence
[Guest]: and my identity, to marry a capital language pen.
[Guest]: So when I now look back at it, I'm rather pleased that I found that form.
[Guest]: I'm also pleased by the various liberties I have taken by doing the reportage, poetry,
[Guest]: photography, you know, I photographed in five different countries, I think.
[Guest]: I've covered migrant workers in that book, so I'm pleased with that.
[Guest]: But one thing that I don't find often, that has become more a feature of later books is
[Guest]: narrative, just to settle into narrative, and that has been the change.
[Guest]: I used to, the other aspect is, I used to think that I'm standing at the station, there's
[Guest]: a suitcase and I will go back to India.
[Guest]: And I will go back to India, that was the feeling when I came to this country for several
[Guest]: years, I didn't even take a license because I thought, what's the point, I'm going to
[Guest]: go back and be a journalist, you know.
[Guest]: Arvind Das used to be alive then, he would say, yes, you come, you will get a job here,
[Guest]: no problem.
[Guest]: And that was a wonderful place at that time, Dilip Padgamkar, etc.
[Guest]: And I stayed here, and then, I mean, I began thinking that in academia, the kind of writing
[Guest]: that is happening, especially in postcolonial theory, it's very limiting, there is no search
[Guest]: for a wider readership.
[Guest]: And so I began thinking, so I wrote Bombay, London, New York, or Husband of a Fanatic,
[Guest]: because I wanted to have a larger readership and to have conversations that were a bit
[Guest]: more reportorial rather than written from a seminar room.
[Guest]: So that has been one thing.
[Guest]: By the time, but still, it was about India.
[Guest]: But when I was writing Immigrant Montana, which was published in India as The Lovers,
[Guest]: I thought, no, I should write about my experiences here.
[Guest]: And so I tried a little bit more of an exuberant language, also a mixed up language, and I
[Guest]: tried to write about here, you know.
[Guest]: But maybe the story is that of a man who was from Bihar.
[Guest]: During the partition, he goes to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And then his name was Iqbal Ahmed.
[Guest]: And then he got a scholarship and came to America.
[Guest]: And from America, he went to Tunisia and became involved in the Algerian struggle.
[Guest]: He was a friend of the PLO.
[Guest]: And when he returned to Princeton, where he was a PhD student, he got involved in the
[Guest]: Vietnam, in the protests against the Vietnam War.
[Guest]: And then he was jailed for conspiring to kidnap Kissinger.
[Guest]: So John Berger had written his story, but it ended with the time he crosses over into
[Guest]: Pakistan.
[Guest]: So I thought that after that, in his life, especially the incident of Kissinger, I should
[Guest]: follow that.
[Guest]: And I wrote my novel, Immigrant Montana, based on that.
[Guest]: So from then, you know, this idea of how to bring the two worlds that are most closest
[Guest]: to India and US, that has been the main attempt.
[Guest]: And that is why, if you look at the British cover of A Time Outside This Time, you will
[Guest]: see that it is split in half.
[Guest]: One half is Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: The other half is Trump.
[Guest]: And they both meet in a nicely symmetrical way.
[Guest]: And that has become now, in some ways, a focus of my writing.
[Amit Varma]: Sir, it's a horrific cover.
[Amit Varma]: If you vote, who will you vote for?
[Amit Varma]: So here's a question.
[Amit Varma]: There is, at the heart of being a writer, it seems to me that there is a contradiction,
[Amit Varma]: and there are two aspects which seem to go against each other.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll talk about both those aspects.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those, I'll read out this bit from your book, where you wrote this message to
[Amit Varma]: Michael Ondaatje.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote, quote, My wife called me from her car.
[Amit Varma]: She was crying.
[Amit Varma]: She had been on her way to the pharmacy that is only five minutes away, but something bad
[Amit Varma]: had happened.
[Amit Varma]: Driving on the dark road.
[Amit Varma]: It was late evening night gathering all around the glow of daylights.
[Amit Varma]: She had struck a deer.
[Amit Varma]: She said she had been unable to react in time.
[Amit Varma]: And now she couldn't move in her seat.
[Amit Varma]: A man in the car behind her had stopped and asked her if she was okay.
[Amit Varma]: He then used his phone to call animal control.
[Amit Varma]: A woman slowed down to inform her she was offering judgment that the deer was suffering.
[Amit Varma]: My wife said nothing to her.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, she said it was a beautiful animal.
[Amit Varma]: After a while, she saw the animal control truck.
[Amit Varma]: She told me it had come to a halt behind her.
[Amit Varma]: Then she heard a shot.
[Amit Varma]: And she didn't want to talk anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the detail of then she heard a shot, you know, just that much extremely powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And you write in your and this is again from the blue book.
[Amit Varma]: And you write how Ondaatje, thank you for the account.
[Amit Varma]: And he said he had a story for you.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote the story, quote, A man driving in Dorset was stopped by the cops.
[Amit Varma]: He looked very disturbed.
[Amit Varma]: The cops grew suspicious and made him step out of the car.
[Amit Varma]: The man said that something had happened an hour earlier and he could not get over it.
[Amit Varma]: He said nothing more.
[Amit Varma]: The cops searched the car.
[Amit Varma]: And in the boot, they found a dead badger.
[Amit Varma]: The man had hit and killed.
[Amit Varma]: He was still grieving.
[Amit Varma]: The driver was Ted Hughes.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Remarkable story.
[Amit Varma]: This is one aspect.
[Amit Varma]: And this is the aspect of empathy.
[Amit Varma]: What happens when we read literature is that, you know, we are born to live one life.
[Amit Varma]: But by reading literature, by reading novels, we can inhabit the heads of others and live
[Amit Varma]: the lives of others.
[Amit Varma]: And that, it seems to me, is something that would naturally build empathy, which is why
[Amit Varma]: I can look at various people such as your two cover models for which you just showed
[Amit Varma]: and assume that they've never read a novel in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the other aspect of this, again, comes from, I think this was in one of the other
[Amit Varma]: books that you quoted, Com Toybin.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote again from the quote, Toybin had told a class he was teaching that, his
[Amit Varma]: quote now, you have to be a terrible monster to write, his quote ends.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is material, the writer was saying, even confidences that someone has indiscreetly
[Amit Varma]: shared with you.
[Amit Varma]: Toybin's advice to writers was to go ahead and use the story, even if readers were going
[Amit Varma]: to identify the person you were writing about.
[Amit Varma]: The writer's credo must be, use it because it will make a great story.
[Amit Varma]: Toybin had said, if you can't do it, then writing isn't for you.
[Amit Varma]: You have no right to be here.
[Amit Varma]: If there is any way I can help you get into law school, then I will.
[Amit Varma]: Your morality will be more useful in a courtroom, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So these are interesting contradictory aspects, which despite being contradictory, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me must both exist.
[Amit Varma]: One is tremendous empathy, and the other is basically the mind of a sociopath.
[Amit Varma]: That I have to tell a story, I have to tell it in any way.
[Amit Varma]: These people will die, the story will live.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts?
[Amit Varma]: Like you mentioned Janet Malcolm and her thoughts on journalism earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And the second aspect of it is also a question that she brings up, that these people you
[Amit Varma]: are writing about become instrumental to you.
[Amit Varma]: You speak to them, not really to listen, to understand them, to empathize, but to look
[Amit Varma]: for material.
[Amit Varma]: Where will you find a good one, which you can use in your story?
[Guest]: I like the point you made about empathy.
[Guest]: That's something I think about every day.
[Guest]: In fact, my last novel, A Time Outside This Time, it started with a question about empathy.
[Guest]: I asked him, you know, what happened was that it was in 2016, a few months before Trump
[Guest]: was elected, I had gone to give a talk in upstate New York.
[Guest]: And I was driving back, and the lynching of Mohammad Akhlaq in Dadri, it was the first
[Guest]: anniversary was.
[Guest]: So I thought, what can I write which will remind people of what happened and maybe make
[Guest]: them think a little bit.
[Guest]: It was an exercise in empathy, frankly.
[Guest]: So the first line I wrote, I was driving, I had a notebook in my hand, a small notebook.
[Guest]: I wrote, a lot of life is left in a man being killed.
[Guest]: What are his thoughts as he's being killed?
[Guest]: What does he think?
[Guest]: It was a presumptuous act.
[Guest]: But at the same time, that is what a writer must do.
[Guest]: They must presume to enter the lives of others with an effort to touch other people or to
[Guest]: make them think about other things.
[Guest]: And then that question got linked to another question, which was that of what can you give
[Guest]: a dying man?
[Guest]: What can you write that will make someone give a dying man a drink of water?
[Guest]: In which a man, maybe in Hapur, is asking for water after the cow vigilantes have hit
[Guest]: him so badly.
[Guest]: No one gives him the water, and he then settles down and dies.
[Guest]: So I think if you do not think about empathy, you cannot write.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, I also think it's wrong to assume that reading will necessarily make
[Guest]: you more empathetic.
[Guest]: My friend, whom I invoked earlier in this conversation, Teju Cole, once wrote about
[Guest]: this and said, isn't it true that all those people who were the guards or the officers
[Guest]: in the concentration camps, did they not listen to Beethoven and Mahler before turning on
[Guest]: the gas in the gas chambers?
[Guest]: All these officers had their bungalows next to it.
[Guest]: After killing people, they would go to their homes and their children and they lived perfectly
[Guest]: normal lives and listen to music.
[Guest]: Great achievements of German culture.
[Guest]: So there isn't a clear link necessarily between writing, though one hopes there is.
[Guest]: Certainly in writing, in producing it, how can you write without having an empathetic
[Guest]: imagination?
[Guest]: How will you enter the lives of others?
[Guest]: So that's a crucial point accepted.
[Guest]: Does it exist in contradiction with this other desire?
[Guest]: Yeah, my friends, including again, my friend Teju, disagree with Cole Toibin's command
[Guest]: that you have to be a monster to write.
[Guest]: I embraced him because I went with this feeling.
[Guest]: I armed myself with this sentiment when I went to Patna.
[Guest]: I'm not going there to celebrate it.
[Guest]: I'm going there to be as honest as I can.
[Guest]: And there was this poet whom I admired a lot.
[Guest]: And I thought his marriage was especially difficult.
[Guest]: I should be honest in writing about it.
[Guest]: And I had this thought, even as I was walking with him in a park in Patna and talking to
[Guest]: him, and then I went somewhere else with him, and then I went to a mall with him.
[Guest]: I was thinking, this guy will think that I told him all these stories.
[Guest]: I was thinking, he must think I will, he must, he must feel betrayed.
[Guest]: And then I thought, but that is what I must do.
[Guest]: I frankly did think that, and I'm not necessarily proud of it, but neither am I ashamed of it
[Guest]: because I thought that is my dharma to write what I have come to find out.
[Guest]: And I'm sure he was upset.
[Guest]: And then when my mother died, he came to the funeral, and I went out, I saw him, so I re-embraced.
[Guest]: And then he began telling me a story.
[Guest]: And he's always a great storyteller, so I just listened.
[Guest]: He said, he mentioned another writer, and he said, when he died, and I think the death
[Guest]: might have been in Mokama or somewhere, I can't remember, somewhere in Bihar, and this
[Guest]: other writer was in ICU, and death was imminent, and his daughter came out and said to my friend,
[Guest]: the poet, she said to, ki dadda, ap unse jaake kahiye, I know I cannot let my father die.
[Guest]: So my friend, the poet, said to me, toh main gaya, main ICU mein gaya, aur main unse kaha,
[Guest]: let's say his name was Vinod, the writer whose name, he said, Vinod, lotao, lotao, lotao.
[Guest]: He said, main bade jor se kaha, and he's saying this, in this large public gathering, mournful
[Guest]: gathering for my mother's funeral, and everyone is spellbound, listening to this man, this
[Guest]: tall, bearded fellow, telling the story about calling someone back from the door of death.
[Guest]: The friend died, of course, but this was a great story, and I thought, isko bhi mein kahi,
[Guest]: main toh iski pehli kahaani mein bataao, aur yeh bhi kahaani mein kahi na kahi bataoonga,
[Guest]: aur wahi main abhi kar raha hoon, Amitabh Armaa ke saath, bhai sahab ki kahaani mein aapko suna
[Guest]: diya, so one has to be, I think, again, to talk about Suketu, for example, Suketu always says,
[Guest]: he uses that term, a writer's dharma, and I am with Janet Malcolm Boss,
[Guest]: ki agar aapne mujhe apni kahaani batayi, toh main toh kahaani kaha raha hoon, main toh
[Guest]: aapki kahaani dohra hoon gayi, so you be careful, Amit, in whatever you write to me in your emails.
[Amit Varma]: No, you would, the kind of person that I am, I don't think you want to write boring books,
[Amit Varma]: toh usme kuch mahal nahi hai. I'm fascinated, listen, listen, listen.
[Guest]: This is why Chandra Haas doesn't send you long emails. It was amazing. I have a short,
[Guest]: a very two-line things about both these things that you've just said. One is,
[Guest]: I always, I do not understand it, but I'm fascinated by the stories that you sometimes reveal,
[Guest]: either on a blog or on Twitter, about your experiences playing poker.
[Guest]: Wo mujhe kyunki wo duniya, meri duniya se bahut alag hai, magar it is very interesting,
[Guest]: you know, and so I don't think it is boring at all, first. Second, talking about Chandra Haas,
[Guest]: this is a story that will probably not interest you because I've repeated it a few times with him,
[Guest]: but it was amazing. He and I, probably on the same evening that I saw you,
[Guest]: but he and I got into a taxi and the taxi wala turned around, because I was joking with the guy,
[Guest]: he was an older man, I was talking to him, I was joking with him, and he said, dekhiye,
[Guest]: he wanted to sell us aphrodisiacs, and he said ki yeh jo hai, yeh guli jo hai,
[Guest]: isme gold hai, yeh capsule mein gold hai, isko aap kharidiye, aur isko aap lejiye,
[Guest]: aur tab iski takat dekhiye. So I said, bhai saab mere paas bahut takat thi, yeh chandra haas hai,
[Guest]: isko bahut zarurat hai, isko aap isko bejiye. So there was a story there also. Anyway,
[Amit Varma]: so let me stop there. Yeah, go ahead. One of my friends with whom I did episode
[Amit Varma]: 250, Naren Shenoy, who is known as a great storyteller, kuch bhi aap bolo, he'll tell
[Amit Varma]: you an incredible story, which actually happened. And we always wonder ki yaar,
[Amit Varma]: we have also lived in the same world. We don't have such stories. And to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: I guess it's a matter of noticing. But I have lived in Bombay all these years,
[Amit Varma]: boss, no taxi driver has ever offered me a gold cup. That's because they look at you and they know
[Amit Varma]: that you don't need it. That's because they look at me and they say lost cause, kuch nahi hone
[Amit Varma]: wala hai iska. So normally, when I start my conversations, pehle ek der ghante, we talk
[Amit Varma]: about the person's past, their childhood, growing up, all of that. And I realized we got into all
[Amit Varma]: these thematic digressions and didn't touch upon that at all. So we'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. And when we come back, we'll kind of go all the way back, you know, to when it all began.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well,
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course,
[Amit Varma]: The Art of Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction. In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends,
[Amit Varma]: I share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises,
[Amit Varma]: much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000
[Amit Varma]: per GST, or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good
[Amit Varma]: writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea
[Amit Varma]: of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Amitabh Kumar, whose latest wonderful book
[Amit Varma]: is The Blue Book, a writer's journal. And he's written a whole bunch of sort of incredible books.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to sort of now know about the journey of Amitabh Kumar before he, you know, became the
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh Kumar we all know. By the way, you know, I was thinking earlier today, that I realized that
[Amit Varma]: we think of each other as friends. I realized that when you come to Bombay, we meet. I cannot
[Amit Varma]: for the life of me remember how we know each other in the first place. Do you remember?
[Guest]: I think I used to read your blog. That's how I came to know him. And we have several mutual
[Guest]: friends. You know, I think Prem Panikkar might have said something or Nilanjana Roy or maybe
[Guest]: Rahul Bhattacharya because you used to write on Crick Info. So I think maybe that was the
[Amit Varma]: introduction. I don't even remember. Interesting, isn't it? Again, just thinking aloud. The other
[Amit Varma]: day I was thinking that we live in unique times in the sense ki mere jo sabhi abhi dost hai,
[Amit Varma]: they are sort of friends that I've made well into adulthood. You know, none of the people I am with
[Amit Varma]: in touch with a daily basis are people who were in school with me in college with me or even in a
[Amit Varma]: workplace with me. You know, they are all people I have met because of the internet people like
[Amit Varma]: you and I or all of these people Prem Panikkar, Nilanjana, I would not have met any of them or
[Amit Varma]: Chandrahas. Chandrahas perhaps, but otherwise, if not for the internet, it wouldn't have happened.
[Amit Varma]: And we are the first generation who are kind of benefiting from this ability to create a community
[Amit Varma]: of choice to say these are my people, whether it's mutual interests or mutual inclinations that kind
[Amit Varma]: of bring us together. And therefore, I think the texture of our lives is far richer than if we were
[Amit Varma]: born in say 1920. And you are restricted by geography, the people you can choose as friends
[Amit Varma]: from around you are, you know, it's a very small pool. Say, say, I mean, that is true. And yet,
[Guest]: I feel and this is I'm saying that just because I've been thinking about it. I feel that this
[Guest]: that while all that you're saying is true. But even this community of choice is not an
[Guest]: unchanging community. In other words, if you think a little bit, internet has been with us
[Guest]: for, I don't know, at least 25 years. Let's say 20 years of some, if not email, then at least social
[Guest]: media, that sort of interaction. You have indeed made new friends and you have created a new
[Guest]: community. It is true. But then now think how that has changed also. In other words, what have
[Guest]: been the conditions under which one close internet friend has given way to another?
[Guest]: And now why has that happened? If we understand that, then I think we would have a better
[Guest]: understanding of where we are going. You know, for example, what was the era of blogs? You know,
[Guest]: I don't know whether you remember, I'm sure you remember, when you started Rabout, I was also one
[Guest]: of the contributors to it. Who are those people? Did we feel very close to each one of them?
[Guest]: And if not, why? And now, where are those folks? And who are the others who have given way? And
[Guest]: why? Is it because blogs have given way to Facebook or Facebook to Twitter or Twitter to
[Guest]: Instagram? Or what? What else is happening? I sometimes think about all these things.
[Guest]: And basically, I think, since I once earlier invoked the idea of my funeral and ZD's note,
[Guest]: I often think who will be at my funeral, you know? Which friends will come? And sometimes I also
[Guest]: think that maybe in funerals, those friends also come who are no longer friends. Because they want
[Guest]: to honor a certain past. And they want to remember who they were in that past. So maybe you and who
[Amit Varma]: knows, even Chandrahas will come to my funeral. Even Chandrahas? What is the inside story of this
[Amit Varma]: event? I have to find out from one of you one day. No, you've sort of set me off on a path of also
[Amit Varma]: thinking about it. Rave Out, by the way, for listeners who might be wondering what it was,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, India Uncut, my blog was on Blogspot 2003 onwards, and then I took it to its own domain.
[Amit Varma]: And when I took it to its own domain, I very foolishly thought that let me start some other
[Amit Varma]: sections. One of them was Rave Out, where people write about books, music, films, which they like,
[Amit Varma]: so they're not reviews, they're recommendations and 200-300 words. And you were one of the people
[Amit Varma]: who kindly joined in, Nilanjana was there, Chandrahas was there, Jaya Arjun Singh was there,
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And I soon realized I'd made a big mistake because people were coming to the blog
[Amit Varma]: only to read me. And that's also, you know, when I don't, as far as my own creative work is
[Amit Varma]: concerned, I don't think of scaling, I don't think of making it something bigger. Because
[Amit Varma]: there is an intimate space I have created, for example, with this podcast. And that's a comfort
[Amit Varma]: zone for both me and my listeners. And I don't want to kind of mess with that. But I want to
[Amit Varma]: sort of follow up on what you said about, and I'm thinking aloud, because I haven't really thought
[Amit Varma]: about it in these terms before about, you know, how have these friends changed. And I think one
[Amit Varma]: of the very dangerous things that social media has done is that it has made everybody performative,
[Amit Varma]: especially what you see on Twitter. Or in fact, Jonathan Haidt had spoken about the rise in
[Amit Varma]: depression among female teenagers in the US over the last 10 years. And his point was that, look,
[Amit Varma]: people said that the boys will go awry because they're playing violent video games all the time.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, the boys were fine, because the video games helped them with problem solving
[Amit Varma]: and logical thinking and all that. It's the girls for whom it was a problem, because earlier,
[Amit Varma]: what would happen is, teenage or pre teenage girls, and I'm simplifying from what I remember
[Amit Varma]: or what he said, so forgive me if it's simplistic, but earlier teenage or pre teenage girls would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, hang around in the school or hang around somewhere, and they would talk about this or that,
[Amit Varma]: and it was casual, and it was comfortable. But Instagram and other social media made everything
[Amit Varma]: performative where you had to compete with the other person to portray a certain image of yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, led to bad mental health issues. Like I think I heard this one story of
[Amit Varma]: how these parents felt that Instagram was messing up their daughter's mind. So they forbade her
[Amit Varma]: from going to Instagram for two weeks. And she killed herself because she couldn't do without it.
[Guest]: You know, and even if you're on Instagram, and you kill yourself, if you're removed from it,
[Amit Varma]: actually, is that depressing? Yeah, yeah, it's depressing. And that's one aspect. And the other
[Amit Varma]: aspect is Twitter, where the incentives are towards finding your tribes or your echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: in on one extreme or the other. And once you figure that out, then you have to rise in status
[Amit Varma]: within that tribe, you have to signal, you know, either your purity to the cause you attack people
[Amit Varma]: from the other side, you're always talking to people, or rather, you're always talking at people
[Amit Varma]: or mocking them, you're not engaging in dialogue, there are no conversations, everything is personal,
[Amit Varma]: if someone disagrees with you, they are bad. It is not that they disagree, they are just bad,
[Amit Varma]: period, you know. And what I think that often does is that there is an incentive to cast judgment,
[Amit Varma]: you go on Twitter, you quote tweet somebody, you snark on that person, you feel wise and virtuous
[Amit Varma]: and better than the other person that you are snarking on. And this can also affect relationships.
[Amit Varma]: Now, thankfully, I haven't lost any friends because of this per se. But I see people I'm
[Amit Varma]: acquainted with, who are on the edges of my social acquaintance, we may share common friends,
[Amit Varma]: who will behave in ways online that they would never behave in real life, because no decent
[Amit Varma]: person would behave like that in real life. You know, I mean, what is a quote tweet, if you think
[Amit Varma]: about it, you and I are standing at a party, and suddenly you turn to a third person. And while I
[Amit Varma]: am there, you point at me and say, see what Amit said, you know, lol, he is such a moron. And that
[Amit Varma]: would be such an incredibly rude thing to do, uncivil thing to do in a real world setting,
[Amit Varma]: but it happens all the time on social media. So I wonder if you have any thoughts on that in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that how because it's changed the incentives for how we behave and how we perform, it affects
[Guest]: friendships and relationships as well. Yeah, I mean, the first thing we were talking about,
[Guest]: with Comte de Wien, you have to be a monster to write. Well, everyone is now a writer then,
[Guest]: and everyone is therefore a monster. It goes, it shows the poverty of, I mean, I don't know whether
[Guest]: I should say that way. But you know, what Comte de Wien was subscribing, that ideology begins to
[Guest]: appear very pernicious, because it becomes legitimate or legitimized behavior. I'm very
[Guest]: interested in the fact that, you know, earlier, you used the phrase, we will talk about my childhood
[Guest]: in a bit, but you talked about the community of choice. Well, you have a community of choice,
[Guest]: but you also have an unwanted community that, you know, because everyone is there now in your
[Guest]: bedroom or in your living room, because I was writing a novel about fake news. I was interested
[Guest]: in following some of the conversations on Twitter or on being there, at least or being active there,
[Guest]: some sort of a presence. I don't find it a space of release or freedom or calm or solace. It is
[Guest]: some place where I might go if there is an event happening that is that important, you know, just
[Guest]: to see what people are saying. But I find it a hard thing and I find it, I find people are,
[Guest]: I find it more akin to a stampede than to a conversation. I find mass thinking of that
[Guest]: sort also disturbing. So, I think it narrows the spectrum of thought and nuance and feeling.
[Guest]: So, I'm not a fan. On the other hand, I don't think one can shut oneself off from it. So,
[Guest]: I want to keep a presence. And most probably, after you air my show, or air this conversation,
[Guest]: I'll tweet the hell out of it. Well, we'll talk later, maybe. But I found it interesting that
[Guest]: you don't try to think of scale, that you think of an intimate space. And I think that's a smart
[Guest]: thing you're doing, because then that whole earlier conversation we had about being authentic
[Guest]: to oneself, that also holds sway, because then we realize that you're not trying to structure
[Guest]: something or shape something to please someone else. You're doing something for a certain choice,
[Guest]: community. And that's great. Everyone who appreciated the conversation with Mrinal
[Guest]: Pandey, I hope is going to appreciate our little chat, though I have not yet had a story as
[Guest]: fascinating as a refugee. You know, I love the stories she told about Shivani and Dharamveer
[Guest]: Bharti and how she sent those letters, how her mother would give her. And I thought of my own
[Guest]: children, my God, maybe I should assign them some tasks. And then her mailing. And I also thought,
[Guest]: this is a silly thought, but please forgive me. I thought, oh, my God, she would have the article
[Guest]: sent. What a loss would it be if it had been lost? It was a fascinating conversation.
[Amit Varma]: It was fascinating. And I think this is also fascinating. And you're right that people who
[Amit Varma]: like that episode will certainly like this. I mean, because it's,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I mean, these are themes I keep going back to because I just kind of find them so
[Amit Varma]: fascinating. But how many times will I say fascinating? I think, you know, there are
[Amit Varma]: tropes on the show that, oh, you know, take a shot every time Amit says multitudes or whatever.
[Guest]: Fascinating is one of those things. I have noticed double click. Let me double click on it.
[Amit Varma]: I picked it up from a guess. I've forgotten which guess. Otherwise, I would give credit.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems a very nice way, double click, mouse over. So, you know, all this is used.
[Amit Varma]: But let's now go back to your childhood. Tell me about that. You know, where were you born?
[Amit Varma]: When were you born? Tell me a little bit about the texture of your days growing up. Because
[Amit Varma]: when I speak to someone like Mrinalji, for example, as you would have noticed,
[Amit Varma]: I find that magical because that is a world lost to us. I mean, one illusion that all of
[Amit Varma]: us suffer from is that the world that we see is a world that it is and there's nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking to anyone from the past, from that generation, pre-liberalization, pre-technology,
[Amit Varma]: pre all of this, you realize that life had a certain enforced era. There was no choice but
[Amit Varma]: me time because where is the smartphone? I mean, you know, we were limited by what we could read.
[Amit Varma]: They have everything available to them. We did not, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about growing up and how your view of the world kind of expanded,
[Guest]: what kind of kid were you and so on? Yeah, man, I cannot narrate any story from my past
[Guest]: without at once, as if on the same page or next to it, see how I have represented it in my books.
[Guest]: In other words, this might be apocryphal, but I remember Amitabh Bachchan saying
[Guest]: at some point that he would not and Harivansh Rao Bachchan was still alive.
[Guest]: But I remember Amitabh Bachchan saying that when his father would die,
[Guest]: his father would die, he would perhaps and I might be misremembering it, but the way I remember it is
[Guest]: that he would perhaps think of all the times he had heard the news of his father's of a father's
[Guest]: death or when he in a film that he was playing the role of the son. And what I got from that
[Guest]: was the idea that when his father, his real father died, the experience would not be so much empty,
[Guest]: as much as it would be layered. He would remember these other deaths. You know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: Where he had played the bereaved son. You're always drawing upon your own past in your own books.
[Guest]: I am certainly. The opening, I mean, very close to the opening of my book, The Lovers, which was,
[Guest]: as I said, published abroad as Immigrant Montana. There is a line which goes something like this.
[Guest]: The red-bottomed monkeys climbed down from the tamarind trees and peeled the oranges left
[Guest]: unattended on Lotan Mamaji's balcony. So this is a memory from Ara, where I was born, an early
[Guest]: childhood memory. In the story, we read that a monkey, a middle-sized young male, instead of
[Guest]: peeling the orange left unattended that day, he picks up a gun, a pistol that belongs to the
[Guest]: narrator's maternal uncle. And he points it first at the cousin who is lying in her crib,
[Guest]: the narrator's cousin. And then the monkey, turning the gun around with a primate
[Guest]: finger, thumb joining, pulls the trigger and blows his brains out. Now, there were monkeys when I was
[Guest]: growing up. I was born in Ara, in Bihar, in my maternal uncle's home. And I had a cousin who was
[Guest]: a little younger than me. There were monkeys all around. There was a tamarind tree. It was not a
[Guest]: monkey, but it was I, as a boy, who I have been told, took the gun from under the pillow of my
[Guest]: maternal uncle and pointed it at my cousin. And everyone just held their breath, not wanting to
[Guest]: startle me, till I turned it around and then the gun was taken away. But because I associate,
[Guest]: especially because my uncle was an alcoholic and brought great devastation in that family and
[Guest]: other things, I associate that period or that act with this violence that I then brought into the
[Guest]: scene. So that is one story. One story which I don't think I've put into any of the books is that
[Guest]: I don't know whether you know, under an astrological sign, you're born, you're called a
[Guest]: sataisa, which means in Bihar. So for 27 days, your father can't see you. And when he sees you,
[Guest]: agar dekhe toh apshakun hoga, unpar chati aayegi, he will have problems. And when the father first
[Guest]: sees the child, it has to be as a reflection or something. I can't remember the story,
[Guest]: but I was that kid. So when the story was told to me, I immediately thought I must, of course,
[Guest]: be a malign presence in the life of my family. And especially when I was, because I was a very
[Guest]: bad student, I thought, of course, I am, because, you know, I brought such disgrace to my father,
[Guest]: who after my 10th grade exams, came to the door and said, kya karoge, riksha chala hoge,
[Guest]: patna mein kya karoge, ab tum hi soch lo, doctor engineer toh tum bane nahi kabhi,
[Guest]: nahi ban sakte ho. So anyway, so for 27 days, my father could not see me. He was
[Guest]: a young magistrate at that time. And then he came to see me. And I believe he first saw me as a
[Guest]: reflection in a small pool of oil. So that and that's how our alliance began as father and son.
[Guest]: I was a great disappointment to my parents because I had a very erratic academic performance.
[Guest]: I was all right in college, in school. Magar jis taraka hota hai, bad luck. You know, I was,
[Guest]: even when I came to, on a scholarship to Delhi and studying in modern schools,
[Guest]: mein, Angrezi mein, kam se kam, bahut achcha tha. Aur wajah ek exam ke pehle,
[Guest]: ek pre-exam ki ek exam hoti hai, usme I got the highest marks. But when the 12th standard exam,
[Guest]: jo CBSE jo imtahan diya, toh usme mujhe, Angrezi mein, they gave me 53 marks,
[Guest]: which was a great shock. I was going to do a BA in English, but with 53 marks, main kya karta,
[Guest]: they allowed, if you paid 250 rupees or something, I can't remember, they allowed you to,
[Guest]: it was called a reassessment of some kind, I can't remember the formal term. Magar mujhe yaad
[Guest]: hai, main Indraprasth gaya, NCIT ka office hai, whatever, CBSE ka office tha, and I filed that
[Guest]: application, but I could not improve my grade. Wahi hi raha hai, 53. Toh bada shock tha, toh my
[Guest]: father said ki, bhai, Angrezi mein toh bahut kam aaya marks tumko. And as luck would have it,
[Guest]: main India mein top kar gaya, political science mein. Toh my father said ki, aap political science
[Guest]: padhi hai. Toh main bhi bahut disappointment and rage mein, political science padhne gaya,
[Guest]: I never did well. It was very embarrassing. I also found my, as I have mentioned earlier,
[Guest]: I found my teachers disappointing. Yeah, by the way, I should also mention, people will,
[Guest]: I think it was a friend of Jai Arjun's or someone who, on Facebook, wrote against me on this point
[Guest]: too, or maybe, I can't remember now. Mujhe, I was invited by Hindu College, where I was a student,
[Guest]: to come and give a talk after my book, Bombay, London, New York came out. Toh main gaya aur in
[Guest]: a spirit of honesty, main kaha ki bhai aisa hai, there was students, there were teachers whom I
[Guest]: had known myself, there was a principal sitting in front. Main kaha, my teachers here failed me.
[Guest]: Nothing that I was taught here ever connected with what was happening on the street outside.
[Guest]: Bahar mein, main bus pe baitha hu aur in the, you know, we pass the samsaan ghat, jahaan par
[Guest]: main dekhta tha, fathers taking small bundles to be buried. Badi gareebi bahar aur away rasta,
[Guest]: corruption, tarah tarah ki tragedies happening. Bhopal tragedy happened at that time.
[Guest]: I said, and then I would come to my classroom, I was studying political science,
[Guest]: Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, naam toh lete the, lekin kabhi ek ne, no, not one teacher in a lucid way
[Guest]: connected what we were learning to what we were seeing in the street outside.
[Guest]: When I was saying all this, the principal first walked out, then a few teachers walked out. The
[Guest]: students seemed to be enjoying it, but a couple of the students didn't. And I remember one of
[Guest]: the students complaining about it on one of the malls, that she felt that I was being an arrogant
[Guest]: asshole. But you know, I don't know. Main ek din jitna mahinat karta hu, apne class mein,
[Guest]: apne students ko pradhane mein, I think these people had not done it in a year.
[Guest]: When they would lift their notes, when they opened their notes to read out
[Guest]: their lectures, little bit, the notes were so old that little bits would flake out like dandruff.
[Guest]: Toh mujhe toh badi disappointment thi us education se. And I therefore did not,
[Guest]: and partly of course it was my failing. I wanted to be a writer at that time or
[Guest]: even the nights before the exams, I was reading, I don't know, works of literature.
[Guest]: I remember one day trying to be reading Herzog, aglae din exam thi, mujhe koi idea nahi tha.
[Guest]: It was a sad experience during education, you know, the seeking for literature of language,
[Guest]: but not finding it in the classroom anywhere. A couple of things I did at that time,
[Guest]: which helped me was, India International Centre mein, videshi films dikha jaate the.
[Guest]: Aur Pragati Maidaan mein, there would be retrospectives. Toh Shyam Benegal ke films,
[Guest]: for example, maine wahan retrospective mein dekhe, Gurudutt, Satyajit Rai.
[Guest]: Aur India International Centre mein, Renoir, Truffaut, wagar, Goddard aur toh, you know,
[Guest]: by the way, Pragati Maidaan mein toh, Falaknua mein bahar baith ke free rata tha,
[Guest]: ya vada nominal ticket aur neeche ek aur, I can't quite remember the name of the theatre below that.
[Guest]: But in India International Centre, you could enter only if you're a member for these films.
[Guest]: Toh main bahar khuda aata tha, passing guest se poosha tha, main aapke saath aa sakoon.
[Guest]: It was like being a beggar, really. And some people took, you know, offense at it. The other
[Guest]: people were very kind. There was an IPS officer, a South Indian man. He would see me and he would
[Guest]: let me come. You know, we never spoke, but he would say, OK, come. I mean, I wonder what his
[Guest]: name was. I'm forever grateful to him. Because main film dekhta tha, aisa Truffaut ke film dekhna
[Guest]: hai. And I look at two characters, they're on a bicycle, they're biking, wo music hai. And I would
[Guest]: think things like, oh, is tar se narrative ki jati hai, rhythm hota hai, something like that. Or there
[Guest]: would be a cut and I would think, ah, this is how you edit something, where you can introduce a
[Guest]: certain tension or surprise. So that was my real education. Ki yeh library mein gaya. I really
[Guest]: think that many people are natural born artists or they do things that is amazing at a very early
[Guest]: age. Mera aisa kuch nahi tha. It has been a long, hard struggle through unknown roads to arrive
[Guest]: at a place where one can at least put down on one page a certain testimony of what one sees
[Guest]: around oneself. The other thing that happened was that I came abroad. And here, finally, I was able
[Guest]: to do, I had already done an MA in Linguistics in Delhi University, that's when I applied. And then
[Guest]: I did an MA in Literature. Toh yaha par aake meri academic career zara baithar ho gayi. In fact, I
[Guest]: started getting 4.0. Toh, you know, it's a nice marks like that, etc. Mere advisors ne aap
[Guest]: kahe ki you should do PhD. I had thought ki bhai main 2 saal rahunga, kuch reading waiting karunga,
[Guest]: fir wapas aake journalist ban jaunga Times of India mein. Magar after the MA, the teacher said,
[Guest]: nahi nahi aap PhD kije. Toh phd mein then you get sucked into a routine and a different life.
[Guest]: And I thought, now I'll be an academic. And, you know, I became an academic. But,
[Guest]: I mean, on one hand, there's no argument against learning. On the other hand, it also delays
[Guest]: the actual act of creation. PhD ke bhaja, bhaiye kitab list dete toh baithar rahta hai mera khayal
[Guest]: sir. You know, so I always feel that as a loss. I also feel the loss of, as I have said before,
[Guest]: the language was lost to me when I stopped writing in Hindi. But I also feel as if
[Guest]: India se connection toot gaya. So the idea of going back and doing journalism,
[Guest]: aapne kahi baar naam liya Husband of a Fanatic ka, you know, it was a useful thing.
[Guest]: For example, Husband of a Fanatic started this way. It was Kargil war. I got married to a woman
[Guest]: who was from Pakistan during the Kargil war. And I wrote a piece because India and Pakistan were
[Guest]: playing cricket in the World Cup at that time also. And someone was wearing a sign that said
[Guest]: Cricket for Peace. Toh maine socha bhaiya jis din shadi hui ki main quick piece likdu.
[Guest]: Marriage for Peace. Aur woh maine Hindu me chhapa aur mujhe ek right wing ne,
[Guest]: organization, Hindu Arthwaar organization ne, ek hit list pe daal diya. Toh wahan se
[Guest]: ek kahaani shir hui. Now, regarding journalism, one thing I did was that I went to my school in
[Guest]: Patna and asked the kids, whom I have not known, but it was my school. I went and said ki bhaiya
[Guest]: aap log aapki tarah hi hain, aapke umr ke, can you write letters to children in Pakistan?
[Guest]: And the letters they wrote, some of them were full of hate, some of them were full of love.
[Guest]: And then I, thank God, got a visa to travel to Pakistan, badi dikkat se mili.
[Guest]: And I went to my wife's school in Karachi and I read out the letters
[Guest]: and I had the Pakistani kids write responses. Now, I'm trying to say to you that by
[Guest]: employing a certain degree of creativity in journalism, I was able to reduce the distance
[Guest]: that always threatened to divide me from my origins, you know. Jaise Gujarat me riots ke baad
[Guest]: jaana, ya Kashmir jaana, ya kahin aur jaana, ya Jharkhand jaana aur thodi se investigative story karna.
[Guest]: Yeah, if I think about this book that I was holding up a moment ago, A Time Outside This
[Guest]: Time, you know, going and trying to investigate or write about the killing of a guerrilla leader,
[Guest]: ek naqsal ki mauth basically, on meeting the police informant or meeting police officers
[Guest]: wagar, usse laga jaise ki I'm bridging a gap, not necessarily becoming Indian,
[Guest]: but at least trying to find out a little bit about what I have missed out over the years
[Guest]: by being abroad. And that has been the story in some ways of a formation where a mix of memory
[Guest]: and a mix of reportage has led to a few narratives, which we have discussed so far.
[Amit Varma]: Lots to double click on as the phrase goes in all of this. But before that,
[Amit Varma]: I want to sort of address another question. And I'll read out a bit from Husband of a Fanatic,
[Amit Varma]: in fact. And in that you wrote, quote, in Raza's Aadha Gaon, and you're referring to Rahim Mazum
[Amit Varma]: Raza's famous story Aadha Gaon, and you write, quote, in Raza's Aadha Gaon, the protest against
[Amit Varma]: a nation is made in the name of the village. When the fiercely well-educated Muslim students
[Amit Varma]: come to Gangauli to preach about partition and the necessity for the creation of a new nation
[Amit Varma]: of Pakistan, the Muslim villagers are genuinely bewildered. One of the villagers is a young man
[Amit Varma]: called Tannu who has returned from battle fighting for the British in the Second World War. He argues
[Amit Varma]: against the urban visitors in the name of his village. And now you're quoting him. I am a
[Amit Varma]: Muslim, but I love this village because I myself am this village. I love the indigo warehouses,
[Amit Varma]: this tank and these mud lanes because they are different forms of myself. On the battlefield,
[Amit Varma]: when death came very near, I certainly remembered Allah, but instead of Mecca or Karbala,
[Unknown]: I remembered Gangauli. Stop quote. And I found this so moving. And I want to ask you,
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask you, what is your Gangauli? What is home to you? And I asked that not in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that I want a definitive answer, because in my own case, I don't have a definitive answer.
[Amit Varma]: It was my sense of home was contained in people and memories and things which have kind of drifted
[Amit Varma]: and dissipated. So in a sense, I feel homeless. There are places where I'm more comfortable than
[Amit Varma]: other places, but I don't think I have a Gangauli. So I want to ask you, what is your Gangauli or
[Guest]: what has your shifting notion of home been? I think those people are very lucky who have a
[Guest]: Gangauli. And that luck is part of an ethos and this is a part of a time that is now gone.
[Guest]: People like my father, it has been very difficult for me to convince my father to sell off the
[Guest]: small bit of land that we have in the village. His connection to it is almost as if a connection to
[Guest]: an umbilical cord. I mean, he's going to remain connected to it and he doesn't have a life outside
[Guest]: it. There will always be certain scents, certain sounds, certain tastes that make me feel as if,
[Guest]: oh, I'm more alive now. A particular kind of paratha or a particular kind of achar se wahi rishta hai.
[Guest]: Ek tarah ka, you know, Ravish Kumar se hamisha baat hoti hai ki bhi, aaye aaye, maans khayiye
[Guest]: ya machhli khayiye. You know, a particular kind of, and this is also because I've invoked Maharaj
[Guest]: Vajpayee before, the idea in Champaran of a certain kind of khasi ka maans, you know, a goat meat,
[Guest]: is important for a class or a caste of people. They're not from the same caste,
[Guest]: but you know what I'm saying is that the idea is that is a genuine homecoming.
[Guest]: The most honest answer I can give you is my Gangauli is the printed page on which I have
[Guest]: created my own temporary map of the Gangauli of my past and my future. Language
[Guest]: is the only nation that I can now commit myself to. Does that make sense to you?
[Guest]: And I say that particularly while noting that Rahim Masoom Raza's protest
[Guest]: is against the idea of a narrow nationalism. And you and I boss are living in a time
[Guest]: where nationalism, a resurgent kind of hyper-nationalism has once again
[Guest]: staked its claim on our psyches and is condemning lots of our folks, not just to death,
[Guest]: but that other death that is hatred. And that hatred that people are carrying in their hearts
[Guest]: carrying in their hearts is very, very dangerous and will change our societies
[Amit Varma]: for a very long time, if not forever. Yeah, I agree with that. And we'll
[Amit Varma]: come to that and kind of double click on that as well at some point in this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But first, I you know, you've also in one place written about written quote, in other words,
[Amit Varma]: a writer arrives at a sense of place not by mere accident of birth or habitation,
[Amit Varma]: but by creating again and again, a landscape of the imagination.
[Unknown]: Stop quote. And this goes back to, this goes back. Sir, this is from your book.
[Guest]: I think this must be, this must be husband of a fanatic, I think.
[Guest]: Okay. So here's an answer to your earlier question about, it's not making me cringe.
[Guest]: I'm like thinking, yes, you're right. This is right.
[Amit Varma]: Admiring yourself. Anyway, I interrupted you. Sorry.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and one of the things I've sort of examined in past episodes also is the nature
[Amit Varma]: of memory, like one of the interesting, like I had done this episode ages back with Anshul Malhotra,
[Amit Varma]: and I keep referring back to it because it made quite an impression on me. She, of course,
[Amit Varma]: wrote the books about memories of partition, where people carried objects from the,
[Guest]: from one side to the other. It's a great idea.
[Amit Varma]: And while researching how, what memory was like in preparing for that show,
[Amit Varma]: I realized that neurologically, memory is that if something happens,
[Amit Varma]: the first time we remember it, we remember it. But the second time we remember the remembering,
[Amit Varma]: and the third time we remember the remembering of the remembering and it,
[Amit Varma]: and they can be a game of Chinese whispers in the brain. So you and I can remember having coffee
[Amit Varma]: when we last had coffee, but we might have completely separate memories of what actually
[Amit Varma]: happened. You know, and just going to that theme, like at the start of this conversation, we spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how, when we write in a sense, we are constructing the self. And of course, a part of
[Amit Varma]: the self is memories is that sense of home that we are constructing in the absence of an actual
[Amit Varma]: Ganguly, so to say. And that also, of course, leads me to the depressing thought of what happens
[Amit Varma]: when these memories go on, you know, which I have seen happening to people where I've seen it
[Amit Varma]: happening happen to my father, for example, where at the end of his life, everything just goes.
[Amit Varma]: And then what is your sense of self? Who are you? You know, and so do you feel that in all your
[Amit Varma]: writing, therefore, by being so self reflective, which is also something I'll ask you about,
[Amit Varma]: but by being so self reflective, by making your own life, by being a monster to your own life,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, turning all of it into material, you know, you write about certain memories,
[Amit Varma]: but at the time, was it that for you? Or is it that in the remembering you have given it
[Amit Varma]: significance made it something else, sort of shaped an imaginative world, which is now your past,
[Guest]: but which wasn't necessarily like that then? It always bothered me that the 1984 Bhopal tragedy
[Guest]: did not at all inspire me to take a train. I was, you know, I was 21 years old.
[Guest]: I wanted to be a writer. Why did I not get on a train and go? Yeah, what stopped me? I'd never,
[Guest]: you know, there's a wonderful documentary filmmaker in India, Rahul Roy, he was my neighbor.
[Guest]: When Indira Gandhi was killed, he was going and working. He said that evening that he was going
[Guest]: to go and work in a refugee camp. I was very curious about what he was doing. But I did not
[Guest]: go that night. Why did I not go? So for me, memory has been an examination of the past,
[Guest]: but it has also led to, therefore, the act of writing where I then go to find someone where
[Guest]: what I missed out on. So, for example, I was in school in Patna when prisoners were blinded
[Guest]: by the police with the use of acid and needles, needles and acid.
[Guest]: I was in my early teens, I think. But later on, I went looking for those men.
[Guest]: And the encounter with those men and my asking questions about what had happened
[Guest]: was for me a sort of, of course, it's imagination in order to, imagination as a motivation
[Guest]: or curiosity as a motivation to shape a narrative which had missing parts.
[Guest]: So that's my first response. It's not directly answering your question, but I'm trying to say
[Guest]: that writing for me has always been, and certainly so now, the most creative thing one can do
[Guest]: thing one can do to record memory, to shape memory, to make sense out of the infinite chaos
[Guest]: that always surrounds us. And that chaos includes forgetfulness. And that's what I'm doing.
[Guest]: Ask me another question so that I can narrow it down or properly respond to you,
[Guest]: because I want to, because I think maybe I've not responded right to your question.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think my question, in a sense, was not really a question. It was a sort of vague and
[Amit Varma]: imprecise musing at some level, because what we remember and our self image, our memories and our
[Amit Varma]: self image are really constructed in a sense by us, by storytelling that we do. Now, most of us,
[Amit Varma]: we do the storytelling, just in our heads in a very ad hoc kind of way. But some of us are writing
[Amit Varma]: all the time. And therefore, one writing leads to greater self reflection. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: there is a greater chance that if you write in good faith, and if you write in complete honesty,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, as sort of every line of what you've written in all your books shines through with
[Amit Varma]: that, then there is a greater chance that you are able to, you know, see through the BS as it were
[Amit Varma]: to see your own role. Like in another in an earlier episode, one guest has said that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what is, you know, one question that people should sometimes ask when they're creating
[Guest]: something is what is my role in this play? I see. Okay, okay. Let me address that in a slightly,
[Guest]: I hope I'm not interrupting you. Can I speak about that?
[Guest]: Please, please, please, please.
[Guest]: There is a line by John Berger, which Arundhati Roy has used as an epigraph to
[Guest]: her novel, The God of Small Things. Kiran Dasai has used the same epigraph in Inheritance of
[Guest]: Loss. And Michael N'Datche has used that same epigraph in one of his books. That line is,
[Guest]: no story can be told as if it were the only one. And so, and you have, of course, during this
[Guest]: conversation, come to it in a different way when you were quoting earlier this line in a different
[Guest]: way. Now, I think the desire for honesty or meticulous accounting is one thing. But it
[Guest]: cannot be, it cannot proceed with the complacency that you are telling the whole truth. And
[Guest]: therefore, my addition to the line you quoted is, you know, what is your role in the play is instead
[Guest]: like, would be more like, what is the story that, what is the story that you're telling about
[Guest]: yourself maybe hiding? Or what does it exclude? And you cannot always be aware of that. And so,
[Guest]: I have just finished a story, a novel actually, which has now gone out to publishers and let's
[Guest]: see who publishes it and who accepts it, in which I have tried to tell a story, which is the father's
[Guest]: story, and then have the daughter's story, just as a way of thinking what gets left out so often
[Guest]: in each of our narratives. When Husband of a Fanatic was published, some people wrote in
[Guest]: the reviews, or at least one or two people, that this is the story of this man, this is the story
[Guest]: of the husband, where is the story of the wife? Now, I did not think it was my job to tell the
[Guest]: wife's story, let my wife tell her story. But it would be good, and I hope I have made space
[Guest]: for the possibility that the reader knows that there is this other story.
[Guest]: I tried to do it, I have tried to follow a certain ethic. I went to meet a man who had put me on a
[Guest]: hit list. When I called him, he said, I said, I want to meet you, sir. And he said,
[Guest]: how are you? Now, when he was talking, my wife was worried at that time. When I was talking,
[Guest]: my wife had said, the police had come to my house to say that you blah blah, you know,
[Guest]: this was in Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania. So, when I went to meet him in New York,
[Guest]: so my wife had said, please call me. I called from a public phone.
[Guest]: He said some very violent, vulgar things about him.
[Guest]: My wife is a very straightforward, straight-talking person.
[Guest]: And I had to say that I said nothing. I actually just tried to take notes. And I tried to tell
[Guest]: myself, even as we were walking, and he was saying things like you fuck her and you fuck Islam
[Guest]: through her. I was thinking I must remember these exact words.
[Guest]: And was I being a good person? I don't know. But I thought I was doing my job.
[Guest]: If not only did I listen to him carefully and write it down carefully,
[Guest]: but I also revealed to my reader that my wife had this question and that I did not have a
[Guest]: satisfactory answer for. And that I am now telling you the story. Let me give you another example,
[Guest]: if you don't mind, from the husband of a fanatic. You know, I'd gone to these camps,
[Guest]: and I spoke to these women. And I was struck by the fact that there had been so much violence,
[Guest]: that the understanding of the children had been so changed that if you asked someone,
[Guest]: if you know, I have this little account there of a girl being asked, what is rape? And she says,
[Guest]: and she says that rape is when you tear off the clothes and throw the girl on the fire.
[Guest]: You know, when I spoke to women who had been raped, it was,
[Guest]: you know, it was a great responsibility to both listen and then transcribe and write down what
[Guest]: they were revealing about their experiences, including what they were trying to shield
[Guest]: me from and shield themselves from. Okay, I recounted a little experience,
[Guest]: where a man asked me, who has given you my number? The previous night I had been to a dinner,
[Guest]: where I'd asked, because an Indian, because a Hindu woman had been killed for protecting her
[Guest]: Muslim lover, I asked at the dinner, do you guys know of any couple from the both religions?
[Guest]: And this gentleman, whom I can reveal now because he's dead,
[Guest]: it was Pratik Sinha's father, Mukul Sinha, a wonderful human rights lawyer. He gave me a
[Guest]: number, but he said, you know, it is dangerous. Do not mention that I gave it to you. And so I
[Guest]: called this number and the man wanted to know who is, who gave you this number, because these are,
[Guest]: you know, and I had to lie. I said, I don't know who he was. I met him at a party.
[Guest]: Now, I thought I should tell this story and tell the story in order to reveal how
[Guest]: I got a story and what happened in the story. But when I read this chapter out
[Guest]: at the University of California in Riverside, where they were considering me for a job,
[Guest]: a woman said, this man lies. Not only does he lie, he tells you that he has lied.
[Guest]: We should not give him a job. I did not get the job. I didn't particularly want it,
[Guest]: but I'm telling this to you, that people, even when you are being honest,
[Guest]: even when you are being honest, and my desire has been to be honest on the page always.
[Guest]: And of course, there must be feelings, but I'm saying that has been my desire and my purpose.
[Guest]: People will not necessarily give you credit. They'll think that if you have admitted to lying
[Guest]: and you have admitted to lying, and if you have done this on the page, then you must be a liar
[Guest]: and must be condemned as such. So there are pitfalls of such honesty, but I'm okay with that,
[Guest]: because the page on which you try to be honest should be an open page. It should be open to the
[Guest]: interpretations of different people, and you should be held in judgment. It's all good. It's
[Guest]: all good. It's all good. It can't be fixed. It should remain an open idea.
[Amit Varma]: You know, first of all, what you mentioned about at the Shah-e-Alam camp, you know,
[Amit Varma]: then you ask a nine-year-old girl, what's the meaning of baladkar? And I'll just read a response
[Amit Varma]: out in Hindi, because I think it's just more sort of evocative, that when she says,
[Amit Varma]: Main batao didi, baladkar ka matlab jab aurat ko nanga karte hai aur fir usse jala dete hai.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And later on, you write, and I'll quote you again,
[Amit Varma]: When I began to speak in the Shah-e-Alam camp to an 11-year-old boy whose name was Raja
[Amit Varma]: Bundabhai Qureshi. When Raja told me his story, a terrible story of his mother and sisters killed,
[Amit Varma]: I saw from the way in which he recited the details that in the name of charity and the need for news,
[Amit Varma]: this little boy had been turned into an automaton or an agony machine. Insert a coin into the slot
[Amit Varma]: and hear a recitation about rape. And later on, at one point, I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: right in your last chapter, before you write about the Bhagalpur blindings,
[Amit Varma]: you speak about this village called Logan, where there is this young Muslim man called Nazim. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Hindus from neighboring villages and everywhere come and they basically slaughter
[Amit Varma]: all the Muslims in the village. He manages to get away. Later, he comes and all the Muslims
[Amit Varma]: had gone to these fields where they were slaughtered and he manages to identify his wife's
[Amit Varma]: body by the clothes that she's wearing and all of that deeply moving story. And at this point,
[Amit Varma]: you imagine, how can he go on again? What happens is seven years after this, he's got a second wife,
[Amit Varma]: he's living in the same village, around the same people who, you know, and I'm just struck
[Amit Varma]: by that normalization in both these examples, where in the one case, this little boy has seen
[Amit Varma]: his loved ones being killed, but he recites it like an automaton, like an agony machine,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it so eloquently. And on the other hand, there is this person where everything has
[Amit Varma]: been destroyed and putting myself in his shoes, I find it hard to imagine how I could go on.
[Amit Varma]: But he goes on, everything is normal again. And you refer to the times that we live in,
[Amit Varma]: and we see this again and again, around us, as if there is an acceptance that life is
[Amit Varma]: tragic and shit happens. And you just go on in the same way. So whatever happens, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people just kind of go on living their lives and everything is normalized. And this can lead to
[Amit Varma]: terrible things, whether it's Rwanda, or whether it's in Nazi Germany, or whatever, things get
[Amit Varma]: normalized that yesterday would have seemed extraordinary. And victims accept it as well,
[Amit Varma]: that when everything is uprooted and gone. So in a sense, it's almost as if two opposing forces,
[Amit Varma]: where as a journalist, as a writer, you come to talking to these people, in full openness,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you are in a sense, also burying yourself in the way that you write, because
[Amit Varma]: you're also writing about yourself. And, you know, so you've buried yourself in that way.
[Amit Varma]: But they are either treating behaving like agony machines, or whatever they're reciting,
[Amit Varma]: you're one more person from the press, one more social worker who's come, whatever,
[Amit Varma]: or they treat you as instrumental. Like you talk about when you went to Bhagalpur,
[Amit Varma]: and you spoke to both the police and the victims of the blindings, you know, one policeman and one
[Amit Varma]: victim, both of them asked you for the exact same thing, which was that license for a tailor or
[Amit Varma]: whatever outside the station. And they were looking at you as instrumental. In fact, the book ends on
[Amit Varma]: that very poignant note, which I thought was such a powerful way to end the book because there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing definitive about it, no definitive conclusion you take away. There is a man to
[Amit Varma]: whom a terrible tragedy has happened, but he is behaving in this petty embarrassing way at the
[Amit Varma]: same time. So what did all of that make you feel that as a writer, you want to go deeper into that
[Amit Varma]: tragedy and the aliveness of the things that happened. But as a human, they have just,
[Amit Varma]: and again, this is, I mean, I don't even know if this is a question or if I'm being particularly
[Amit Varma]: lucid, or even lucent, whatever that is, I'll have to look at it.
[Unknown]: Lucent means luminous.
[Amit Varma]: Luminous, okay, I'm definitely not being lucent. Yeah, so what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because this disturbs me a lot. And as much as something terrible happening, it disturbs me that
[Amit Varma]: that veneer of normality just falls upon it again.
[Guest]: So yeah, as we are talking, major lucent, I just want to be sure, especially because if we have
[Guest]: presented it on a public forum, it was, I think it has to be light. Yeah, glowing with or giving
[Guest]: off light. The moon in the background. I think Thomas Hardy and Tess had used it
[Guest]: somehow about the evening, I can't remember now. Gloaming was another word I had learned.
[Amit Varma]: In the gloaming years of the evening.
[Guest]: The response I have is something like this. That young man whose story I had actually,
[Guest]: unfortunately, forgotten from Logaing, but I remember visiting him.
[Guest]: And I remember the story there. I met a woman also, whose leg had been chopped off.
[Guest]: When I think of that, I think of that young man, for example, that he must have told a story to
[Guest]: himself about what his life has been, what it was like. And then the story has taken a new turn.
[Guest]: In other words, I want to make a very simple and banal point that he must have a narrative about
[Guest]: what has been an interruption. Maybe he thought of it as an obstruction. And then he overcame the
[Guest]: obstruction. It was and then his story has gone forward. Okay, let's keep it in the background.
[Guest]: Now let's come to the present. You and I will remember how on Twitter, for example, during the
[Guest]: second wave, you, your friends were asking for help for x or for y or for z. All oxygen cylinder
[Guest]: needed there, some help needed there, a bed needed there, plasma needed there, etc. Now,
[Guest]: my contention has been my worry as a writer has been that that experience or that story,
[Guest]: that harrowing story will be forgotten by the time the general elections roll around. Not only will
[Guest]: it be forgotten, it will be somehow turned by the powerful, by the people, by the media, by the
[Guest]: powerful into a story of triumph. We brought you protected to the gates of this new future.
[Guest]: And please vote us back into power and we will vote them back into power. So the normalization
[Guest]: that you are speaking about for me is a normalization, not simply of life in some
[Guest]: ways picking up a rhythm that was there before, which probably happened to that young man
[Guest]: in Bhagalpur. For me, normalization is where the powerful manipulate even their worst defeats
[Guest]: into a story of glorious triumph. And that, I think, is a huge injustice.
[Guest]: And I believe in the writing that goes against that, particularly if it can succeed. Do I fear
[Guest]: that that writing can never succeed? Because we are not in the business of writing advertisements.
[Guest]: You know, we don't publish magazines, we publish novels and therefore we will fail. We will not,
[Guest]: you know, 30 people will buy my novel and 30 crore people will vote for them. So that's the difference.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and what I am also struck by, and by the way, there's this one particular
[Amit Varma]: sort of tragic story during the second wave, which happened to a friend of mine,
[Amit Varma]: that both his parents had, you know, caught it and they were in separate ICUs because
[Amit Varma]: they were not getting a place in the ICU. And his dad was in an ICU in a hospital called Jaipur Golden.
[Amit Varma]: So there were 21 people in the ICU ward. And one day the electricity went and the oxygen
[Amit Varma]: machines couldn't work and the hospital couldn't do anything about it. And 20 people died in the
[Amit Varma]: ICU ward. My friend's father was the only one who survived. And when my friend met him the next day,
[Amit Varma]: he said, I want to die. Because he had literally seen everybody around him die.
[Amit Varma]: All the will to live was gone. Meanwhile, the mother is in a separate ICU. And this dragged on
[Amit Varma]: and on where every day my friend would be hustling with people going to the black market getting
[Amit Varma]: cylinders himself and eventually both his parents died. And it is what it is. You know, just as you
[Amit Varma]: know, when demonetization happened, I thought, okay, the largest assault on private property
[Amit Varma]: in human history, and they have to lose the UP elections. And I was completely wrong there,
[Amit Varma]: because I completely missed the point. And I think what I mean, and of course,
[Amit Varma]: Schadenfreude had a role to play in that where people were the poor thought,
[Amit Varma]: oh, the rich are suffering more, which, of course, wasn't true. But also, I think that
[Amit Varma]: we have normalized that nothing will work, the government won't work, nothing will work that we
[Amit Varma]: live despite everything we've normalized that we are apathetic towards it. So we don't actually
[Amit Varma]: connect our vote necessarily, in a causal way to the governance that we get, because we have
[Amit Varma]: assumed the governance will be bad. And I think that assumption is actually largely correct anyway,
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter who you vote for beyond a certain point. And for that reason, no matter what happened
[Amit Varma]: in the second wave, which I think was worse than the horrors of partition, because partition was
[Amit Varma]: in certain areas. In the second wave, every family in this country knew someone at least
[Amit Varma]: who had been affected in terrible ways. The cries for help were everywhere. But I agree,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think it will have an electoral impact. And my question here is this, that what that tells
[Amit Varma]: us is that the most powerful thing in the world is really story, reality doesn't matter. And of
[Amit Varma]: course, you could argue there's no such thing as reality, because, you know, whatever story you
[Amit Varma]: tell, there are other stories to tell. If the world is complex, every story is necessarily simple,
[Amit Varma]: but it, you know, how close or far away from fidelity you are, should matter, but it doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: We live in an age of competing narratives, the truth is completely irrelevant. And it is what
[Amit Varma]: it is. And what you say is that, okay, artists might say that, oh, I'll be authentic to myself,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll do what I do, and I'll write what I have to, and whatever, which is fine. It is
[Amit Varma]: a noble instinct. And those stories won't win, like you said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so what is your sense of this also? Because like recently, I remember I was chatting with my
[Amit Varma]: writing students in one of my latest batches. And I was asked about the difference in writing
[Amit Varma]: fiction and nonfiction. And I said, look, there is no difference. It's narrative, you're telling
[Amit Varma]: a story, there is no difference. It's the same thing. And you know, over the last 40-50 years,
[Amit Varma]: narrative nonfiction writers have used novelistic techniques throughout, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is no difference. And at another level, I feel that there is no difference between
[Amit Varma]: fiction and nonfiction also. So I've kind of rambled, there isn't really a question in this.
[Guest]: But you know, but there's something I want to double click on.
[Guest]: That you're, you know, that when you said that people do believe that governance will be bad,
[Guest]: if that was true, if such belief was endemic, it would be bad enough. But I actually think
[Guest]: it is even worse, which is people come to accept a lot of people, the majority does,
[Guest]: and that's why a government can return to power. The majority believes that governance was not bad.
[Guest]: And that will even be better. That is an even greater level of delusion. And so it is particularly
[Guest]: pestifying and depressing for me, that there should be such a faith in the great leader.
[Guest]: And that there should be such an ideology of hatred for minorities and for others,
[Guest]: that you can coalesce and unite around a certain idea. And therefore, the hegemonic power
[Guest]: of the dominant narrative is even more of a challenge when you think of yourself as a writer.
[Guest]: You think, oh, my God.
[Guest]: So it's a very, very depressing thing. And yet, you have to, I mean, what I'm doing,
[Guest]: I mean, at one level, it is just the act of trying to take note of the news,
[Guest]: of the news, trying to think of a creative response to it.
[Guest]: So I think of the Blue Book, for example, as an attempt to preserve my humanity.
[Guest]: Bad things are happening. How do I respond with beauty? And I'm not saying I've created
[Guest]: the most beautiful thing in the world. But what I'm saying is, it is my attempt to find something
[Guest]: which I can cherish and which I can share with someone and say, here, here, here is a gift of
[Guest]: the date. You know what I'm saying? I have received news of the death, but on the piece
[Guest]: of newspaper that has brought me the news of the death, let me draw a flower. Because
[Guest]: it's the time of April. It's April. There are daffodils in our backyard. So why not draw it?
[Guest]: So I think that is one role. At one stage, it's a testimony that I am. This happened to me. This
[Guest]: happened to my brother. This happened to my friend's father, whose father said, I have no
[Guest]: desire to live now. So it's a testimony. The other, as I said, is the gift, the gift to tomorrow,
[Guest]: or the gift even to today. The sunset was on the creek behind my house.
[Guest]: We are in lockdown. My students, I made a sign for them. Today's office hours at Sunset Lake.
[Guest]: So a gift in the face of terrible happenings, a small offering of beauty.
[Guest]: And it looks beautiful in the night. So I thought that sort of a thing. And then beyond writerly
[Guest]: acts, boss, you think of someone. What was his name? Hanuman or Hanuman? Narwal. And his daughter?
[Guest]: Natasha Narwal. Natasha Narwal. When I think of the young protesting,
[Guest]: I mean, you know, Umar Khalid in prison, give me a break, boss. Does he deserve to be in prison?
[Guest]: And don't we need people like that in the classroom or out in the streets? Wouldn't he be a
[Guest]: great example for the young to think about how to serve their country? To think about,
[Guest]: shouldn't we at least stand in solidarity with people like that who are paying such big sacrifice?
[Guest]: I think that is our job, you know, to honor that. So I think beyond what we do as writers or
[Guest]: something, I want to say, boss, how to lend solidarity to these very brave people, many of
[Guest]: them young, many of them older than even me, and think that we should at least support them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I should, I'll again double click on a couple of those aspects. But I should also point
[Amit Varma]: out that to my listeners that even though Amitabh is aware it's an audio podcast, he was showing me
[Amit Varma]: all these pages as he was talking about them. So that's a rustling that you heard. So sadly,
[Amit Varma]: that is for my benefit alone. But if you pick up the wonderful book, which by the way, I found
[Amit Varma]: beautiful. And I'll tell you, like, one approach that I have for this podcast, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is that I'm not trying to just go through space in terms of geography, people will listen to me
[Amit Varma]: in different places. I'm trying to go through time that in 2050, if you listen to this, you
[Amit Varma]: get a sense of a person or the sense of how an idea was looked at and all of that. You know,
[Amit Varma]: if I have a four hour conversation with a person, a part of that person is sort of
[Amit Varma]: embodied, you get to listen to it and get a sense of what was going on. In that sense,
[Amit Varma]: this book was very enriching for me in a similar sense as well. Like already while reading it,
[Amit Varma]: I went down different rabbit holes and discovered different writers. I remember I'd recorded an
[Amit Varma]: episode which Raina Bhattacharya a few weeks ago, a great episode on the loneliness of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: woman that was the title. And my favorite post episode bit was that she'd recommended a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of great books. And I picked up this fantastic book called The Odd Woman in the City by Vivian
[Amit Varma]: Gornick. And I loved it so much. And I thought, okay, this is it's like an added benefit, which
[Amit Varma]: is why I put so much work into my show notes, for example, that I want to make these rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: available for others. So this beautiful book certainly plays that part as as indeed the
[Amit Varma]: conversation does though, for a moment when you said hegemonic power, I was like, Oh, my God,
[Amit Varma]: he's sitting with a PhD student. I apologize unconditionally for that. So here's a broader
[Amit Varma]: question for you. I realized that all these years of my growing up, maybe I'm 48. So maybe for 45 of
[Amit Varma]: these years, I was under one particular delusion, which does not exist. And that delusion was that
[Amit Varma]: by and large, we are a liberal people. Fringe may kuch aise extreme elements hai, but by and large,
[Amit Varma]: we are liberal, tolerance hai, you can see it in our food, you can see it in our languages,
[Amit Varma]: we assimilate. By and large, woh faith tha that you know, whatever you call it, a shared idea of
[Amit Varma]: India that I think you and I at least would share. What I have now come to realize is that I was
[Amit Varma]: living in an elite English speaking liberal bubble. And we are the fringe. And the rest of the country
[Amit Varma]: is what it is. And I don't want to pile judgment and say this is good or that is bad, main apne
[Amit Varma]: nazari se bata rao, but it is what it is. And one common trope, almost a cliche on my show is when I
[Amit Varma]: ask guests and I won't ask you this, but I'll share the questions you can see where I'm coming from,
[Amit Varma]: is that whether our constitution which is actually fairly illiberal, but it's more liberal than
[Amit Varma]: society, that is our relatively liberal constitution, an imposition on an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, can that imposition ever work? Or can that imposition itself be called liberal?
[Amit Varma]: And I've asked this to various guests and got various great answers. But my sense is that what
[Amit Varma]: we see today is that society has caught up with politics. Andrew Breitbart once said,
[Amit Varma]: politics is downstream of culture. And I think that today, the elites have been overthrown,
[Amit Varma]: that what our politics is, is reflective of what our society is, that this hatred and all of what
[Amit Varma]: you see around has come from the bottom up. And I was sort of struck by this fabulous quote from
[Amit Varma]: Husband of a Fanatic, in fact, when you talk to Mr. Jagdish Bharatiya, who is this gentleman who
[Amit Varma]: met you and called you harami and kutta and all of that. And at one point, and you're writing in
[Amit Varma]: the early 2000s, so I found this very prescient quote where you write the quote, the internet was
[Amit Varma]: a gift to Mr. Bharatiya's propaganda, it made him a better long distance nationalist. He said to me,
[Amit Varma]: if the Hindus will be saved, it will be because of the internet, I send out an email, and I'm
[Amit Varma]: able to talk at once to 5000 Hindus, stop quote. And a few years back, when I was musing upon what
[Amit Varma]: kind of happened in India, I sort of applied Timur Kuran's framework of preference falsification to
[Amit Varma]: it. Timur Kuran is a Turkish sociologist who wrote this book called Public Lies, Private Truths.
[Amit Varma]: And his thing was that people often take stances because of what others around them think. The
[Amit Varma]: example he gave was the Soviet Union, right? That before the Soviet Union collapses,
[Amit Varma]: no one is dissenting publicly because they think they are the only ones. And then there is what he
[Amit Varma]: calls a preference cascade, where people realize that others are also dissenters, and then there
[Amit Varma]: is a cascade and it all blows open. And I believe that what happened in India and a big part of the
[Amit Varma]: rise of Hindutva is that there was a preference cascade, that people would not say in polite
[Amit Varma]: society that I don't like Muslims, or a woman's role is in the kitchen, or whatever the case might
[Amit Varma]: be, right? And some of these, you know, maybe I am biased, and I'm putting a negative spin on it,
[Amit Varma]: maybe there's a positive way of looking at it. But there were beliefs, which were not stated
[Amit Varma]: openly, because this elite liberal consensus existed that these are things you can say,
[Amit Varma]: and these are things you can't say. And that's fallen apart. And that preference cascade is what
[Amit Varma]: sort of caused 2014, one of the things that caused 2014. And our society was always like this.
[Amit Varma]: And technology by empowering individuals, actually empowered all the closet bigots,
[Amit Varma]: as I call it among us, who suddenly realized that they were not alone, that they are the majority.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you would broadly agree with? Because you have a lived longer than me,
[Amit Varma]: you've grown up in a smaller town. And you have kept going back as a journalist talking to people
[Amit Varma]: with an open mind and endless curiosity. What is your sense that was there a shift in the way we
[Amit Varma]: were? Or were we always like this? And was this always going to happen?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm a sociologist. I can't give a good coherent answer to that.
[Amit Varma]: But impressionistically?
[Guest]: Yeah, I feel my sense was that it is not that we have become the margins. I feel that
[Guest]: the liberals themselves are revealing their bigotry.
[Guest]: Make passage from a time outside this time. Why must one slow jam the news? Because all that is
[Guest]: new, will become normal with astonishing speed. You will go to visit your father and discover that
[Guest]: he has pledged himself to the service of the great leader. Or you will visit your friend's house,
[Guest]: and it will take a minute or more to realize that a meeting is underway.
[Guest]: And now, everyone is looking at you with suspicion. You notice one fine day that all
[Guest]: the signs on the road have changed. Your town has a new name. Dogs have grown fat on flesh
[Guest]: torn from corpses lining the street where you grew up. The beautiful tree outside your window
[Guest]: is dead, has been dead for some time, and has in fact, just now burst into flames.
[Guest]: I do not know why these changes have taken place. But I certainly know these changes have
[Guest]: taken place. They have taken place in our own homes, and they have taken place in our own
[Guest]: families. It's a big change. Your question is whether it was always there. And I don't know
[Guest]: the answer to that. Maybe it was. But it is startling and shocking. And I don't know also
[Guest]: whether it is reversible. It's like, it's like the fucking climate change, boss. It's been massive.
[Guest]: It's ushering into a new era. And you don't know whether it can ever be turned back.
[Guest]: The glaciers of our understanding, not to be utterly glib, but the glaciers of our understanding are
[Amit Varma]: melting. And the waters are rising. That's a fascinating way to put it. And I love that
[Amit Varma]: passage, by the way. And I'm also really glad that when you spoke of the beautiful tree catching fire,
[Amit Varma]: you did not say it had turned lucent, which no doubt it had. But just, you know, it's this is
[Amit Varma]: all very depressing stuff. So I want to provide a little bit of light relief at this moment. And
[Amit Varma]: I plan to start the episode with this. But before we get back to the serious subject, I'll quickly
[Amit Varma]: go to the light relief, which is that a few days back, I tweeted and I will put this link in the
[Amit Varma]: show notes also about a narrative device run by AI, right with this guy created a site or
[Amit Varma]: Usme you feed in two words, and it will create a short story out of those two words, right?
[Amit Varma]: A nice little writing prompt. But my god, this fucking AI, sorry for the language is so mind
[Amit Varma]: blowing, that I think at some point, humans will just stop writing novels. Now, there are
[Amit Varma]: it's it's on a particular site. It's a complicated URL. But since you were coming in your honor,
[Amit Varma]: I fed in Amitabh Kumar and rats as my two entries and the story it came up with was this.
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh Kumar loved rats, he would take them in and care for them. And they would always return
[Amit Varma]: the favor, giving him food and love. One day, a rat named Rani came to Amitabh Kumar and said,
[Amit Varma]: I know you love me and I love you too. Please let me stay with you. Amitabh Kumar was so moved by
[Amit Varma]: Rani's words that he allowed her to stay with him. And the two of them lived happily ever after.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another one where instead of feeding in Amitabh Kumar and rats, I fed in rats and
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh Kumar. And the story I got, and it creates unlimited ones. So if you feed them,
[Amit Varma]: then you'll get something. Rats and Amitabh Kumar. And this is a story. Rats were always a nuisance
[Amit Varma]: in the Kumar household. They would chew through cables and pipes and disturb the peace at night.
[Amit Varma]: But even more than their destructive behavior, Amitabh Kumar was afraid of rats. He could never
[Amit Varma]: understand why they seem to bite him, despite the fact that he was constantly running and squeaking.
[Guest]: Now let me tell you a story. I was in my home in Pennsylvania at that time,
[Guest]: and I got a call from David Devedar. And he said, we're doing a series on cities.
[Guest]: We would like to start with Patna. It'll be a short book, maybe 30,000 words. Will you do it?
[Guest]: And I said, yes, because I thought immediately of the rats that had carried away my mother's
[Guest]: dentures. Now, when I started thinking about rats, and I thought of the rats,
[Guest]: then I thought of my sister, in whose hospital they had installed, because of the presence of
[Guest]: so many rats, they had installed a machine to frighten the rats. But the rats, as you know,
[Guest]: I've written about that in the book, chewed the wire, and the machine stopped working.
[Guest]: It did not emit that supersonic sound. What is of interest to me is that then I did other
[Guest]: works and tried, but I was thinking of myself as the rat. So many artificial intelligence,
[Guest]: the story that really came out was that Amitabha Kumar was interested in writing about rats,
[Guest]: because rats, for example, had destroyed the land under the railway platform in Patna Junction,
[Guest]: and the platform itself had collapsed. But he was thinking of someone arriving in Patna,
[Guest]: and the rats being the spectators of this arrival. But what he was really thinking
[Guest]: was about his own departure, his departure from Patna. He had left, he had abandoned his parents.
[Guest]: He was the rat who had abandoned the sinking, Patna's sinking ship.
[Guest]: This is my little story. The interesting story is that the book came out, my mother was there,
[Guest]: she was in ill health when the book came out, and a little later she died. When I went back
[Guest]: for her funeral, and this shows you why there is intelligence in the artificial intelligence,
[Guest]: when I went back for her funeral, I woke up at night because a rat had bitten me on my hand.
[Guest]: I thought I was protected under a mosquito net, but the rat had clipped it. There must have been
[Guest]: some sense or taste of food or something on my hand. I woke up, and there was a bite,
[Guest]: and I saw the rat scurrying away, and I could see the bite, you know, I could see the wound.
[Guest]: It's a small bite, but I woke up my brother-in-law, who is a doctor, and he said,
[Guest]: go back to sleep, in the morning we'll give you a tetanus injection. So that is what I got.
[Guest]: So I always wondered whether a book critic had taken the form of a rat and bitten me.
[Amit Varma]: That's a brilliant metaphor, and while we're speaking of metaphors, I also
[Amit Varma]: love how you used it as a metaphor for caste. For example, you speak about how the Musahars
[Amit Varma]: ate rats, and you've described that also, and how it kind of tastes like chicken and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point you wrote, quote, the reason Musahars were looked down on Bihar was that they
[Amit Varma]: ate rats. The official believed that if we all began to think about rats in a more positive way,
[Amit Varma]: caste itself would disappear, and we would no longer think of Musahars as a lower caste.
[Amit Varma]: Did this make sense to them? Did they share this official's optimism? Stop quote. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: you asked this question, and they didn't share the optimism, because it was just overthinking it,
[Amit Varma]: like what, you know. So it's, you know, the symptom is not the disease as such. So let's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, go back to the linear path we kind of abandoned, and start talking about your writing
[Amit Varma]: journey. Like, and by the way, you spoke of your getting bad marks in English in the 12th.
[Amit Varma]: I got more in Hindi than in English in both my 10th and 12th. It's completely bizarre. I can't
[Amit Varma]: explain it. Where did you go to school, by the way? The school was ICSE board. I was in Bishop
[Amit Varma]: School, Pune. And my junior college was Ferguson College, Pune, my 12th, which was what, HSC? But
[Amit Varma]: yeah, whatever. How come you were in Pune, by the way? My dad was posted there. He was in the IAS.
[Amit Varma]: He was in the IAS. Maharashtra Kadar.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, he was Punjab Kadar, which then became Haryana Kadar when the two split. And then he
[Amit Varma]: was director of the Film and Television Institute of India, FTII. So he was there between 86 to 91,
[Amit Varma]: which was very fortunate for me, because I lived in that little red house, you can see from the
[Amit Varma]: road. I've been there. Yeah. And I grew up watching the greatest cinema you can imagine and not
[Amit Varma]: thinking of it as art film or whatever. These were just stories I loved, films I love.
[Guest]: Examples?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I was an early fan of Fellini, for example, you know, E. Vithaloni and Amar Kaur were my
[Amit Varma]: favorite Fellini films, which probably says more about childhood taste than anything else.
[Guest]: And what Desi people, whose films or who are the students there at that time?
[Amit Varma]: I didn't interact much with the students. Though one of them was Sanjay Leela Bhansali,
[Amit Varma]: who my dad expelled from FTII, because he was an editing student. So what would happen is you'd
[Amit Varma]: have these diploma films being made. And you'd team together a director with an editor with
[Amit Varma]: and Mr. Bhansali said, I might be an editing student, but I want to direct and he kicked up
[Amit Varma]: a fuss and there was indiscipline. So my dad rusticated him. And my sense always was that
[Amit Varma]: you rusticated him on the wrong grounds.
[Unknown]: Very good point. Oh, my God.
[Amit Varma]: But that's kind of a different sort of thing. So tell me about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've landed up in America, what is your image of yourself? Like, did you always want to be a
[Amit Varma]: writer? Or were you even then thinking, I'll go back, be a journalist? What was your self image?
[Amit Varma]: And at around what point did that self image begin to fructify into someone who will write
[Amit Varma]: books? And if so, what kind of books? Why? Because, you know, right from your earlier books,
[Amit Varma]: there is that self examination, that self awareness, where you're always not just talking
[Amit Varma]: about what's happening, but bearing yourself as well. So tell me a little bit about those processes.
[Guest]: I think the idea of, you know, finding kind of an education model in the US, which is very
[Guest]: different from what I had in Delhi, was a great inspiration for me. And I thought for a few years,
[Guest]: that I would like to be an academic. So even, but academic writing, because I had always,
[Guest]: I would certainly say during my teen years, early 20s, my only desire was to be a writer.
[Guest]: There was a woman I liked, and who wouldn't have spoken for me more than seven minutes,
[Guest]: I think, in all the years I knew her. But my steadfast goal was to be her boyfriend.
[Guest]: And the other one was to be a writer. The first goal failed, I did not have the cojones
[Guest]: to approach her again and again. But she did admire one piece I had written once,
[Guest]: and she came up to me to congratulate me on that. And I later accosted her after she got
[Guest]: off from a university special outside Stevens. And I said, Hey, would you like to read my poems?
[Guest]: And she said no. And then I didn't talk to her again. So because during all those years,
[Guest]: I had wanted to be a writer, even when I did enter this more rigorous pedagogical and rewarding
[Guest]: model, I thought I should do an academic book, but I thought it should be creative.
[Guest]: And so passport photos came out of that. But I was dissatisfied with being an academic,
[Guest]: I didn't like academic writing. I certainly didn't like academic conversations. And so
[Guest]: I produced a literary memoir called Bombay, London, New York, where I tried to discover
[Guest]: in all these places, a certain trajectory of migrant travel, but also literature written
[Guest]: in these cities by migrant writers, by writers who announced their transitory role, etc.
[Guest]: So I wrote works of nonfiction, that's a husband of a fanatic, a foreigner carrying in the crook
[Guest]: of his arm, a tiny bomb. I wanted to be the person who, I suppose, brought a scene alive
[Guest]: that was drawn from real life. And that was journalistic in the sense,
[Guest]: you know, you mentioned Vivian Gornick, she's a friend of mine. I was inspired by the way she
[Guest]: writes, she reports on life, on friendships, on mothers and daughters, on conversations,
[Guest]: she overhears on the street. So that was my goal. But at some point, there was the desire,
[Guest]: but also the challenge of writing a novel. I was finishing a foreigner carrying in the
[Guest]: crook of his arm, a tiny bomb, which was about, you know, terrorism trials, basically in New
[Guest]: Jersey and New York of desis. Because 9-11, terror state, we emerged, global war on terror,
[Guest]: and they swept up a lot of desis for minor crimes and trapped them into becoming informants,
[Guest]: and also cooked up conspiracy schemes where they could entangle other people and then, you know,
[Guest]: claim that they had busted terrorism plots. My book was a reportage on that. But when I was
[Guest]: just finishing it, I watched Satya. And I thought, okay, who is this guy, especially when I found
[Guest]: out that he was from Champaran. And so I wrote to Shyam Benegal and said, boss, introduce me to
[Guest]: this person. I want to interview him. I had first I thought, especially because then in an interview,
[Guest]: he had been very candid, he had said things like, you know, pee in bed when I was a boy,
[Guest]: and was reprimanded for it. I thought, oh, this man will be frank and open.
[Guest]: And I thought I would write a nonfiction book. And then David Devedar used to be the editor of
[Guest]: Penwin Random House, Canada at that time. In Toronto, when we met, I told him that the boss
[Guest]: have been meeting this guy. I've done interviews with him in Atlanta. I've now gone to the village,
[Guest]: his village in Bihar. I'm meeting him now in Bombay. I think and he said, why don't and I was
[Guest]: telling him what I felt that I had gotten access to, but also how I did not feel it was a book
[Guest]: length thing. And David said, why don't you make it a novel? So I thought, okay, so why not
[Guest]: introduce other characters around this figure who comes from a small town, Betia in Bihar,
[Guest]: and becomes a star in Bollywood? Why not surround him with other figures? And then I wrote a novel.
[Guest]: And I called it home products, because I thought many of the novels I was reading,
[Guest]: especially by Indians living abroad, were not really home products. They were for export only.
[Guest]: So there is Bhojburi also, there are little essays on train travel, etc. And what trains mean in the
[Guest]: Indian imagination. There is many essays on Virender Sehwag, everything in it, you know,
[Guest]: I thought, to a desi reader, how to make a piece of imaginative writing intelligible.
[Guest]: Now, the challenge that fiction posed for me was, was that of invention, to, you know,
[Guest]: to hew close to life, but then to invent things. And here I'm going against what you tell your
[Guest]: students, which I think you're right in telling them that there is not so much of a distinction
[Guest]: between fiction and nonfiction, both of them are narratives, you're making up a story.
[Guest]: I agree with that in principle. But also how to invent things. This challenge has appealed to me
[Guest]: once I started writing that novel. And then I wrote another novel called Immigrant Montana,
[Guest]: or The Lovers. And then I wrote this other one called A Time Outside This Time. And now I've
[Guest]: written another one called My Beloved Life. The idea of writing something close to life,
[Guest]: I've always quoted Jeff Dyer, who says, I write only an inch from life. But all the art is in
[Guest]: that inch. That is what one must teach oneself, one must teach one's students, how to be artful
[Guest]: in that clever manipulation in that little spot of maneuvering. That is that one inch,
[Guest]: how much and in the novel, I'm just trying to widen that inch a little bit more and produce
[Guest]: and produce things on the page that are entirely from my imagination. And I'm finding that a
[Guest]: wonderful challenge, how to invent, how to invent, while hewing very close to life, take real life
[Guest]: events, take some real life characters, but begin, instead of being faithful to the real that has
[Guest]: happened, be faithful to the real that is even more real. That is my challenge. And that is what
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to do in this fiction now. To sort of make it clear for the listeners, can you
[Amit Varma]: give an example of something that happened in that inch? You know, maybe from a book that you
[Amit Varma]: have loved, maybe from your own work or whatever, but something that happened. And then what
[Amit Varma]: happened in that inch that elevated it to literature or art or that really, you know,
[Amit Varma]: struck with you in a sense? Yeah, give me some time because
[Amit Varma]: I'll, an example actually came to my mind of that inch. And it's a very moving example. So
[Amit Varma]: I'll share it with you. And it's from a film. And there was this film, I think by a Croatian
[Amit Varma]: or Serbian called Echo, it's spelled E-H-O. There are many films by that name. This is directed by
[Amit Varma]: a guy called Ren Jerka. And in this film, there are two parallel tracks. And one of the tracks
[Amit Varma]: is that there is this old man who lives alone, whose son has gone missing, and he's missing his
[Amit Varma]: son. And there's no way he can get information about what has happened to this kid. And in his
[Amit Varma]: aloneness, you see him unraveling. And at one point, if I kind of he's got all these video
[Amit Varma]: cassettes and all of that where the memories are, and he takes these video cassettes out.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, he takes out all the kind of film in them. And then you have a scene in the
[Amit Varma]: backyard where he's surrounded by all this film, which is hung all over and he's hacking it down,
[Amit Varma]: you know, almost a literal moment that he was living in these memories. And now he's just
[Amit Varma]: hacking it down, hacking it down. And just an incredible scene. And again, something that
[Amit Varma]: is real. But for me, that's a two inches where art happens and it goes to a different level.
[Guest]: I was telling you a little while ago, of a monkey taking a gun from under the pillow
[Guest]: and pointing it at an infant in the crib before turning it around and blowing his brains up. Now,
[Guest]: that was an inch from life because it was not the monkey, but I who had drawn the pistol. So indeed,
[Guest]: there was a gun and there was a child in the actual scene. But here, it is the narrator who's
[Guest]: watching and it is the monkey who does it. And it has a greater appeal for me because the violence,
[Guest]: because when he shoots, his brains, bits of his skull and brain are splattered on the pictures
[Guest]: of the patriarchs hanging on the wall. And for me, that was a story of familial violence that
[Guest]: took place because of what is unseen in the scene is talking about the topic of your the name of
[Guest]: your podcast, the scene and the unseen is the violence of the uncle who is the alcoholic and
[Guest]: what he action sought. Now, in the example that you just spoke about, about the art, again,
[Guest]: what the inch is, is that I present towards the end of the book, Immigrant Montana, a still from
[Guest]: Satyajit Rai's Pathar Panchali. And I talk about it being from my notebook when I was writing the
[Guest]: novel. So in my notebook, I have cut it out because I saw an article about his storyboards in Outlook
[Guest]: and I took that and put it up. And then I have a note in it about how I wanted wonderful watercolors
[Guest]: that Rai has done suggest to me the feeling of it's as if a light breeze for blowing through
[Guest]: the pages. And it is the feeling of art, immediate and reflecting life. And by putting it into my own
[Guest]: novel, I'm trying to say, this is how this novel came to be. So this is that other two inches.
[Guest]: There's another thing I want to tell you. I thought my narrator is from a small town.
[Guest]: His name should be a little bit more provincial. It can't be something like, I don't know, Sanjay.
[Guest]: I gave him the name Kailash. Do you understand? It's a little bit different. And then in the train
[Guest]: to New York, I was going to see something and in the train, I thought, OK, he has this Kailash has
[Guest]: come to America. He has an Irish roommate who begins calling him Kailashnikov. Kailashnikov
[Guest]: becomes then shortened to AK-47. And AK is also my own initial. Many people in my graduate school
[Guest]: used to call me AK. So by somehow, I was creating a little circle which was resonant in a way. It
[Guest]: was an inch. It was a maneuvering. Maneuvering within a small inch just to produce resonances.
[Guest]: So that's what I mean. It intimacy with what it really is, but also it is a total act of
[Guest]: invention. This idea of the Irishman calling him AK-47 and then it being reduced to AK
[Guest]: and everyone in the teaching assistants calling him AK was an act of invention.
[Guest]: But it was spurred by what was real, but it is something entirely new. So that's what I mean by.
[Amit Varma]: I had a friend in college whose mom was German and his dad was
[Amit Varma]: Maharashtrian. And we used to call him KGB, which was Konkanasta German Brahmin.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also reminded of Mark Waugh's nickname since we're into cricket.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when the Waugh brothers started, Steve Waugh went straight into international
[Amit Varma]: cricket. Mark Waugh took some time. So he got the nickname Afghanistan, The Lost Waugh.
[Guest]: Wow. Wow. A double pun. I think I might have read this on your blog sometime ago.
[Amit Varma]: Something is coming back. Maybe.
[Guest]: It's common trivia. So maybe I don't remember if I brought it back in a day, but.
[Amit Varma]: That is amazing. That is amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Satyajit Ray. And I remember Satyajit Ray would find inches in places
[Amit Varma]: where he just kind of through stillness and not through invention, through letting things
[Amit Varma]: happen. Like I think of the swing in Charulata, for example, or the memory game in Aaranat Din
[Amit Varma]: Rathri, you know, where it's really in his hands the way everything unfolds. And I think there is
[Amit Varma]: that inch of art in the dynamic between our two main protagonists during that memory game,
[Amit Varma]: for example. And there is that inch.
[Guest]: I want to say something. Wait, wait, wait. I want to say something on that,
[Guest]: because you had earlier you had talked about authenticity and we were both
[Guest]: we were both putting a lot of emphasis on authenticity. And now that we have invoked Rai,
[Guest]: I want to talk for your listeners, but also just between you and me a little bit about
[Guest]: how art is the real authenticity.
[Guest]: Because we have discussed that chapter about the blind men in husband of a fanatic.
[Guest]: I've always been a little bit suspicious of the desi from abroad coming back to
[Guest]: investigate and write a story. So I've always had some anxiety about my authenticity.
[Guest]: After I wrote that thing about the blind men, I was having coffee with Ashish Nandy in Delhi
[Guest]: in his house. I totally adore him. So I said, Ashistha, I'm not sure I've done a good job.
[Guest]: Can I read a few paragraphs to you and you tell me? He loved it. He gave it. And he said,
[Guest]: listen, think about Satyajit Rai. There is no more of an authentic document of Indian
[Guest]: rural life than Pathar Panchali. And before he made Pathar Panchali, Satyajit Rai had no
[Guest]: experience of rural life. Ashistha was saying, here is a man who ate even Bengali food with
[Guest]: a knife and fork who produced this document. So why are you worried about authenticity?
[Unknown]: If your art is successful in capturing the real lived life,
[Guest]: then you should not worry about whether you are authentic. I thought that was a great lesson.
[Guest]: So there is authenticity and then there is authenticity.
[Amit Varma]: Let me share with you a lovely lesson I and others got when Prem Panekar did a workshop
[Amit Varma]: for my students, our mutual friend. And he spoke about this writer, I forget this writer's name,
[Amit Varma]: but he spoke about how this writer was asked, how does he write? How does he clear his head
[Amit Varma]: of all the chaos in the world and write? And the writer said, OK, I go inside my room
[Amit Varma]: and I shut the door and then I sit down at my typewriter. And they said, OK, then you begin
[Amit Varma]: writing. He said, no, I don't begin writing. Because even though I'm alone in the room,
[Amit Varma]: there are still so many others with me. And I sit in silence till everybody goes away.
[Amit Varma]: So the person asked, so then you begin writing. He says, no, I don't begin writing because even
[Amit Varma]: if they have all gone, I am still there. And I wait till I am gone and then the story writes itself.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And when you speak about authenticity, when you speak about Ray making Pathar Panchali,
[Amit Varma]: even though he probably had much path with, you know, silver cutlery, that I remember that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems at one level, a bit of a romanticization of an overstatement,
[Amit Varma]: because the story never tells itself. The writer is always imbued in it, like you are,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, in all your work. But I sort of love this story anyway.
[Unknown]: Yes. Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Let me let me move on to asking this. And this is, again, something that there's a shift that
[Amit Varma]: I have seen that has happened over the last couple of decades. And I think it is a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: mind blowing shift with which many artists and creators haven't fully fathomed, which is that
[Amit Varma]: we have been released from the tyranny of form. Like in the 1990s, if I wanted to write,
[Amit Varma]: I could send an article to Times of India and it's 800 words, or I write a novel and it's
[Amit Varma]: 100,000 or 200,000 or whatever it is. And there are these forms and I have to submit to them.
[Amit Varma]: If I'm a filmmaker, I can make something for television that is 24 minutes into which they'll
[Amit Varma]: put commercials and make it half an hour or I make a Hollywood film of 90 minutes, a Bollywood film
[Amit Varma]: of three hours, you have these set formats. What has happened today is we've been released by
[Amit Varma]: technology and audience stays from this tyranny of form. Part of this, of course, happened during
[Amit Varma]: the blogging days, where I didn't have to think about writing 800 word pieces, I could write 80
[Amit Varma]: words, I could write 8000, I could put pictures, I could embed a song in between, I could do
[Amit Varma]: whatever the hell I wanted. In the cinematic medium, I see on YouTube that people are experimenting
[Amit Varma]: with different ways, where there is no longer the sense that these are the forms we are restricted
[Amit Varma]: to, they are freeing their mind, they're doing their own thing, and great things will emerge
[Amit Varma]: out of it. And I think most people, including most creators, still don't realize this completely.
[Amit Varma]: There is like a hierarchy of forms in our head, where if you are a writer, you think, oh, a book
[Amit Varma]: is the highest form, it's a holy grail, and a blog is like very low down, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not necessarily the case. Now, you're someone who's experimented with form,
[Amit Varma]: Bombay, London, New York, or, you know, your short book on rats was a very interesting kind of
[Amit Varma]: experiment in form as well. Passport photos was an experiment in form where you're, you know,
[Amit Varma]: taking the format of a passport. And of course, the blue book is a fantastic experiment in form,
[Amit Varma]: it could be a collection of Instagram posts, as many of these were, right? So how, and so you've
[Amit Varma]: always been open to someone thinking outside the conventional in terms of form, right from the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: So how has your thinking about this sort of evolved? Like, I think, you know, a long time ago,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a book like this would have seemed audacious, where it's really, you know, it would
[Amit Varma]: just have seemed audacious. I don't, I mean, I know Sebald did things with images and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And Calvino wrote A Hermit in Paris, which is really like a collection of blog posts and
[Amit Varma]: incredibly charming. But there isn't that much formal deviation going on. And yet, you've been
[Amit Varma]: open to it, and you've embraced it completely. And this is such a lovely book, because while
[Amit Varma]: it sort of uses the technology, while it kind of takes Instagram posts and puts them on the page,
[Amit Varma]: what it also does is the opposite of what social media does for me, in the sense that it slows down
[Amit Varma]: life and puts me in a quiet place where I can be reflective in the same way as you are slow
[Amit Varma]: jamming with the news. So what are your sort of thoughts on this? And are there other forms you
[Amit Varma]: want to explore in the future? And do you think that your work in a sense is limited to writing,
[Amit Varma]: for example, because one thing I have realized is that what is a creator, you don't only have
[Amit Varma]: to write if you're a writer, you know, you don't only have to make music if you're a musician,
[Guest]: this so many different ways now to express oneself. Yeah, well, thank you for your kind remarks.
[Guest]: I'm so happy that the blue book, which was actually initially Himali Sodhi's idea,
[Guest]: she was starting her agency, a suitable agency. And she just asked me because I would put my
[Guest]: pictures, you know, my drawings on social media, she said, Can we please use six of your something
[Guest]: like that of your images on our site? I said, of course, take it. And then she said, you know,
[Guest]: because of the responses she was getting, she said, you know, we'd love this to be a book.
[Guest]: And that made me think, oh, to my speck on it, you know, to start thinking about different
[Guest]: chapters, you know, so here there are characters, there are sections called, if I remember right,
[Guest]: oh, yeah, there it is presidencies, journeys, writing a novel, postcards from the pandemic
[Guest]: office hours. So I owe some thanks to her. One of the things I have not attempted to do.
[Guest]: But one day, an editor said in India, I said in New York, can you go to bookshops
[Guest]: and say, where is your white literature section, and then write a piece about what they read.
[Guest]: One thing I've not attempted to do is a performance of piece like that, you know,
[Guest]: just like Sophie Kalle, I think that's how you pronounce her name. Sophie Kalle is a performance
[Guest]: artist in France, whose books are just like she hired once a private investigator to follow
[Guest]: herself. And for him to submit his reports, stalking her basically. In another one, she was
[Guest]: on a she asked for a bed to be put on top of Eiffel Tower, and then had people come up and
[Guest]: read to her or speak to her till she fell asleep, and kept a record. In another one,
[Guest]: she follows a guy. And another one she picked up from a hotel room, if I remember right,
[Guest]: a dress book. And she called all the friends on the address book and had them speak about
[Guest]: the guy whose book it was and then produced a book. That is a much more performative.
[Guest]: It is involving the body, also involving interaction of a different kind, I have not done,
[Guest]: but I've thought about it. Lately, I've been thinking, and then I saw that someone else had
[Guest]: already done it. I was thinking, what were the particular dreams? And I thought he would start
[Guest]: a website where people would send their entries. And then I found out that someone had already
[Guest]: done it in America. So what's the experimental cheese performance? And I haven't done an
[Guest]: interactive thing with cinema, for example, but I've often thought about it. You know,
[Guest]: and then have someone make a little visual document of it, which was filmic, and
[Guest]: then explored some temporality that way. They say, journal, third,
[Guest]: or they have played with those ideas. But it has been lovely to just think, I think people find it
[Guest]: liberating. The idea of formal invention is not interesting simply because it's a new form.
[Guest]: It is interesting because people finding something new like that, find in themselves,
[Guest]: an impulse towards freedom. So I hope the blue book does that for people.
[Guest]: I'm going to keep a diary which does Y or Z.
[Amit Varma]: So in the blue book, you have this passage which struck me and again, I'll read this out.
[Amit Varma]: When I think of my youth, I'm suddenly running down a long endless corridor. The sun is hot,
[Amit Varma]: it sits still bleaching the bones of the afternoon. The running figure screams over me,
[Amit Varma]: screams over and over. What a waste, what a waste, you know, so you know, as we kind of come towards,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we've gone well over three hours, and I should, I guess, wrap it up during this
[Amit Varma]: conversation, we've sort of been grazing and no doubt we'll have more conversations where we can
[Amit Varma]: do some more of feasting. But this very evocative image of a man running down the corridors,
[Amit Varma]: saying what a waste, what a waste also leads me to ask you about counterfactuals, about what else
[Amit Varma]: could have happened in your life, not necessarily regrets, because my sense from the little I know
[Amit Varma]: of you is that you would say I have no regrets, I have lived life fully and all of that. That's
[Amit Varma]: absolutely, you know, what I would expect from you. But in general, one thinks of counterfactuals,
[Amit Varma]: like maybe there is a world in which you come back and be a journalist after your MA, you don't do
[Amit Varma]: the PhD, you don't teach there, you throw yourself into things here. Maybe you're a vicious colleague
[Amit Varma]: somewhere. Once a week, you you know, get on the phone and talk to each other about what you what
[Amit Varma]: stories you've been working on this week. That's one life. There are endless lives, endless
[Amit Varma]: counterfactuals, you know, and ultimately, we are shaped by accident, we are shaped by the accident
[Amit Varma]: of our genes. And then we are shaped by the accident of our circumstances, the things that
[Amit Varma]: sort of happened to us. And, you know, luckily, I would say that it would probably be part of your
[Amit Varma]: basic swabhav to have that curiosity, where no matter in what situation you are in, you're curious,
[Amit Varma]: you're open, I would imagine that that is fundamental. But otherwise, one is shaped by
[Amit Varma]: so many other things moving in so many different ways. So as you look back on your life, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is there a man somewhere saying what a loss, what a loss, what could have been maybe things you could
[Guest]: have done or haven't done or whatever, you know? Yes. I think it's an evocative passage,
[Guest]: or at least feels so true to me, because I've gone through, especially during those years of,
[Guest]: you know, when I was in my 30s, I did think what a waste, what a waste the 20s were, you know?
[Guest]: I mean, my students in undergrad, I teach them, for example, in some classes about literature.
[Guest]: So they are reading good books every week. I did not do that. It was all on my own. And it was
[Guest]: of a lower, the speed was less, often erratic, totally autodidact. And the other part is,
[Guest]: I was not writing stories. I asked my students to write stories, and they write stories,
[Guest]: they write excellent stories, and we revise them. It's a great training. Now,
[Guest]: regrets here, boss, what if that girl had said outside the university special,
[Guest]: I would love to read your poems, you know? And then, you know what I'm saying?
[Guest]: Now, as to counterfactuals, I don't know whether you know, let's say Sankarshan Thakur,
[Amit Varma]: do you know the journalist Sankarshan Thakur? I don't know him, I've never met him.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. He and I were classmates. His father asked me to write for their agency,
[Guest]: you know, his father was a well-known journalist. And whenever I think of Sankarshan, I think
[Guest]: that could be, you know, that I would have been doing that because we were together, you know,
[Guest]: we would have become journalists, I would be doing that kind of work. The other thing that
[Guest]: always draws me is, I think of another person who teaches at JNU. And I think, I would have
[Guest]: loved to teach at JNU, you know, and this wonderful social and political ferment.
[Guest]: And I'm sure some of the radical students would have hated me because I would have been
[Guest]: a little bit, I would have tried to go against the current sometimes. But also, the right wing
[Guest]: would have hated me because I would have opposed them. And it would have been interesting place
[Guest]: to occupy. And to be interactive with students who are engaged in the world, to be an academic
[Guest]: there, where I would feel that I was teaching things that served my own compatriots. You know,
[Guest]: I would be involved in the life of the people from among whom I emerged, I wouldn't be teaching
[Guest]: a bunch of strangers who do not know how to pronounce my name.
[Amit Varma]: I get sort of that as well. There is so much we could have spoken about the immigrant experience,
[Amit Varma]: about our politics, about, you know, your experiences in Pakistan and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot to talk about. But we've taken a lot of time and one day we'll do this again,
[Amit Varma]: inshallah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I'll end with a couple of questions. And one of them actually comes from this lovely
[Amit Varma]: section in your book, if anyone, if kya, everybody should buy the blue book. And if you turn to page
[Amit Varma]: 85, you'll find a couple of pages of advice from writers, which they inscribed in their books for
[Amit Varma]: you. And some of them are great, like Lydia Davis says, read the masters and at least occasionally
[Amit Varma]: read them closely. Yehune Lee says, there is always more than one story. Your job is to find
[Amit Varma]: that story you did not start to tell. And then, you know, Jenny Ophiel says, if you want to write,
[Amit Varma]: don't have a backup plan, also always put a dog in your book, and so on. And this is all great
[Amit Varma]: advice. But I'm going to ask you as someone who's you know, and we could easily do a three hour
[Amit Varma]: session on this alone, just the art and craft of writing and so on and so forth. I'd love to know
[Amit Varma]: about all the things that you talk about with your students. But if you had to give writing advice
[Amit Varma]: for people who want to write and you've described yourself evocatively in the blue book as,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you were at 25, you had nothing to write about, you didn't even have the tools. So
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how writing is like waiting. And I think many people who do my course and so on are
[Amit Varma]: in that kind of phase where they know they want to be storytellers, they want to write, they love
[Amit Varma]: language and literature. Maybe they don't have the material yet, maybe they're learning to use
[Amit Varma]: the tools. What advice would you give to young writers like that? Or rather, I wouldn't say
[Amit Varma]: young, it's never too late to start Penelope Fitzgerald being the great example. And hopefully,
[Amit Varma]: I can also be a bit more of a late bloomer. So what advice would you give to any writers anywhere?
[Guest]: Well, thank you for citing all those folks who have written such advice when signing their books
[Guest]: for me. I end that section with this following note. I say, having asked dozens of writers this
[Guest]: question, I have now arrived at what I myself want to inscribe in the books I'm asked to sign.
[Guest]: Quote, language is your closest ally. And if you align it with your desire for freedom,
[Guest]: you will be able to live forever. Unquote. Language is your closest ally. And you have
[Guest]: to think about freedom. Because without that, it'll be empty. You're seeking. Think about freedom
[Guest]: for yourself, for those around you. But boss, what has really helped me, I always tell my students
[Guest]: that any teacher teaches from his or her own example. And for me, what has really helped me
[Guest]: is this task of keeping a notebook handy and writing every day. Kuch bhi nahi aaya. If you
[Guest]: have nothing to write about, my dear friends, look out of the window and write what you can see.
[Guest]: But you must write every day. These days, I've started even doing morning pages. So main soobar
[Guest]: mein uthke, teen minute ke liye, chhe minute ke liye, but I write. Just to unclutter. That has
[Guest]: been the one thing that has really helped me. And the other thing is, I insist on is this 10 minutes
[Guest]: of mindful walking. I wish I could say that it should be exercise, but I myself am unable to do
[Guest]: that. But I should. If you take care of yourself, you become much more mindful. And the body and the
[Guest]: mind connection is so strong that if you take care of your body, you will be affecting your mind also.
[Guest]: So at some level, this mantra of mine, which says write every day and walk every day,
[Guest]: is really intended to serve both your body and your mind. That's how you nourish yourself.
[Guest]: Another thing I've been also doing for the past maybe two years, starting in January 2020, so
[Guest]: now it's the third year, is that every day I keep track of my time. So like every hour,
[Guest]: I insert what I'm doing. I just write. It's just one line, not line even, one word. Dinner or
[Guest]: reading. It has made me so much more conscious of time. So I want to, in this country,
[Guest]: in the US, it is called planner. So I just bought that. So these things really have been the most
[Guest]: useful for me. And that's what I want to offer as advice to people. Fantastic advice. And part of it
[Amit Varma]: reminded me of, you know, in 2006, I traveled through Pakistan with the Indian cricket team.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, there was an ODI in Peshawar. And from Peshawar, one of my friends, one of my
[Amit Varma]: Pakistani friends did some jogar. And because I said, I want to see the Khyber Pass. So they took
[Amit Varma]: us in the jeep down towards the border, we actually went to the border and looked into Afghanistan.
[Amit Varma]: So on the way, we pass these Afridi settlements. Afridi is a tribe which are, you know, and we
[Amit Varma]: pass these settlements. And there were these small houses without windows, there were these narrow
[Amit Varma]: slits. And my friend said, oh, that is where they keep machine guns. I have no idea if that's
[Amit Varma]: apocryphal or whatever. And there were windowless houses with narrow slits. And when you said that
[Amit Varma]: even if you have nothing to write about, you know, look outside your window. But even that's an
[Amit Varma]: interesting kind of reality. Now my final question, which harks back to you know, earlier,
[Amit Varma]: you said that if I have 10 books in my shelf and 10 quotes that I will always whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I think it was in the context of one of the quotes that I picked up from your book. But I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to come back to that because that is something my listeners and I love as a process
[Amit Varma]: of discovery. We're not quotes, but what are you know, a handful of books, I won't give you a
[Amit Varma]: number, but a handful of books which you care so deeply about, that you want to stand on a soapbox
[Amit Varma]: and say, world, read this, you know, you just want everyone to read it doesn't have to be on any
[Amit Varma]: subject, any whatever, whatever are the books that mean the most to you. Recommend some for us.
[Guest]: You know, every day I write the book, which in India was published as writing badly is easy.
[Guest]: I offer some writing advice. But I also have chapters on for example, my favorite nonfiction.
[Guest]: And there's also a use there the quote from William Maxwell that you read out from the Blue
[Guest]: Book. Now, some of those books are ones that I would recommend and I'd also recommend William
[Guest]: Maxwell's own novella, So Long, See You Tomorrow. So that's number one. So Long, See You Tomorrow,
[Guest]: because you see in it the blurring of the line between fiction and nonfiction.
[Guest]: Very small book, but feels epic. It's amazing. A book that was written in light of the violence
[Guest]: against blacks in America. And it was a book that is both what was both a finalist for the
[Guest]: poetry prize and a finalist for the criticism prize. And therefore, I like it for the way in
[Guest]: which it blurs boundaries is Citizen by Claudia Rankine. Thank you. So those two. One of J.M.
[Guest]: Cudzia's book, which one it will be? I don't know. But I want to offer a choice between two books
[Guest]: Waiting for the Barbarians and Disgrace. One of those two books would be a lovely book to have
[Guest]: to address violence, especially on a social and wide scale. There is nothing as pure as the human
[Guest]: voice speaking to you. And Voices from Chernobyl. The writer, the author of that is the first
[Guest]: journalist to have given the Nobel Prize. So I want to recommend Voices from Chernobyl. Also,
[Guest]: because what she does, Svetlana Alexievich, what she does is she might be interviewing you for
[Guest]: five hours or four hours, the way you have been interviewing me. But everything I've said
[Guest]: will be boiled down to a paragraph or a page. And she arranges it, rearranges it. So how to
[Guest]: get something vital from long engagement and then to distill it into presenting something.
[Guest]: So Voices from Chernobyl. I think I'd like to, I was talking about what have been great
[Guest]: influences to me. I think that Book of Poems, Jejuri by Arun Kolatkar. That's one of my
[Guest]: favourites as well. It's also a great way of presenting metaphor, thinking about landscapes
[Guest]: and people, or also rooting it in some tradition of India and observance. I'm trying to think,
[Guest]: you know, for those who are from UP or Bihar, or maybe even from other small towns in India,
[Guest]: I think Vikram sets a suitable boy, not so much in terms of the trajectory of the book,
[Guest]: but more in terms of the idiom that it employs in order to present small-town India or something.
[Guest]: I think it's a wonderful work. And talking about small towns, let me end by,
[Guest]: I think the funniest book that has been written by an India is English August.
[Guest]: So English August by Upamanyu Chatterjee. I think that's, and with, you know, such clever satire.
[Guest]: Such clever satire. And if you want to read the Hindi version of it,
[Guest]: it is Srilal Shukla's Raag Darbari. Masterpiece. Masterpiece. Masterpiece, boss.
[Amit Varma]: So uplifting. So sharp. So Amitabh, boss, thank you so much. This has been incredible. And I just
[Amit Varma]: feel blessed that you spent so much time chatting with me. Hopefully we can do this in person
[Guest]: sometime as well. So thanks a lot for coming on The Scene and The Unseen. I want to thank you
[Guest]: for talking to me, for having read the work. And I want to thank every person who listens to this
[Guest]: for having the patience to, please forgive anything that sounds excessive. And certainly,
[Guest]: if it sounds immodest, it has been a pleasure. It has been a pleasure talking about all this
[Amit Varma]: with your friend. Thank you so much, Amit. Thank you. All right.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.